05 -- Italy

6
Italy
The Absolutist State arose in the era of the Renaissance. A great many of its essential techniques – both administrative and diplomatic – were pioneered in Italy. It is therefore necessary to ask: why did Italy itself never achieve a national Absolutism? It is clear, of course, that the universalist mediaeval institutions of the Papacy and the Empire acted to check the development of an orthodox territorial monarchy in both Italy and Germany. In Italy, the Papacy resisted any attempt at a territorial unification of the peninsula. However, this in itself would not necessarily have sufficed to block such an outcome. For the Papacy was notoriously weak for long periods. A strong French king such as Philippe Le Bel had no difficulty in dealing with it manu militari, by simple and obvious means – kidnapping at Anagni, captivity at Avignon. It was the absence of any such ascendant power in Italy which allowed the Papacy’s political manoeuvres. The critical determinant of the failure to produce a national Absolutism should be sought elsewhere. It lies precisely in the premature development of mercantile capital in the North Italian cities, which prevented the emergence of a powerful reorganized feudal State at the national level. It was the wealth and vitality of the Lombard and Tuscan Communes which defeated the most serious effort to establish a unified feudal monarchy which could have provided the basis for a later Absolutism – Frederick II’s attempt in the 13th century to extend his relatively advanced baronial State from its base in the South.
The Emperor had many assets for his projects. Southern Italy was the one part of Western Europe where a pyramidal feudal hierarchy, implanted by the Normans, had been combined with a strong Byzantine legacy of imperial autocracy. The Kingdom of Sicily had fallen into disrepair and confusion in the last years of Norman rule, when local barons had seized provincial powers and regal estates for themselves. Frederick II signalled his arrival in Southern Italy with the promulgation of the laws of Capua of 1220, which reasserted formidable centralized control of the Regno. Royal bailiffs replaced city mayors in the towns, key castles were repossessed from nobles, inheritance of fiefs was subjected to monarchical supervision, donations of demesne lands were cancelled, and feudal dues for the upkeep of a fleet were restored.1 The Capuan laws were enforced at the point of the sword; they were completed a decade later by the Constitutions of Melfi (1231), which codified the legal and administrative system of the Kingdom, suppressing the last vestiges of urban autonomy and tightly constricting clerical lordships. Nobles, prelates and towns were subordinated to the monarchy by a sophisticated bureaucratic system, comprising a corps of royal justiciars who acted as both commissioners and judges in the provinces, working with written documents – officials who were revolved to prevent them becoming enmeshed in local seigneurial interests.2 Castles were multiplied to intimidate rebellious cities or lords. The Muslim population of Western Sicily, which had held out in the mountains to become a constant thorn in the side of the Norman State, was conquered and resettled in Apulia: the Arab colony at Lucera henceforward provided Frederick with a unique force of professional Islamic troops for his campaigns in Italy. Economically, the Regno was no less rationally organized. Internal tolls were abolished, and a strict external customs service installed. State control of foreign trade in grain permitted large profits for the royal demesne, the greatest Sicilian wheat producer. Important commodity monopolies and increasingly regular land taxes yielded substantial fiscal revenues; a nominal gold coinage was even minted.3 The solidity and prosperity of this Hohenstaufen fortress in the South allowed Frederick II to make a redoubtable bid to create a unitary Imperial State throughout the peninsula.
Claiming all Italy as his heritage, and rallying most of the feudal lords scattered through the North to his cause, the Emperor seized the Marche and invaded Lombardy. For a brief period, his ambitions seemed to be on the brink of realization: in 1239–40, Frederick fashioned a blue-print for the future administration of Italy as a single royal state, divided into provinces governed by vicars-general and captains-generals modelled on the Sicilian justiciars, appointed by the Emperor and selected from his Apulian entourage.4 The shifting tides of war prevented any stabilization of this structure: but its logic and coherence were unmistakable. Even the final setbacks and death of the Emperor did not undo the Ghibelline cause. His son Manfred, without even legitimate birth or the imperial title, was soon able to restore the strategic dominance of Hohenstaufen power in the peninsula, routing the Florentine Guelfs at Montaperti; a few years later, his armies threatened to capture the Supreme Pontiff himself at Orvieto, in a move foreshadowing the future French coup de main at Anagni. Yet the temporary successes of the dynasty were to prove finally illusory: in the protracted Guelf-Ghibelline wars, the Hohenstaufen line was eventually defeated and destroyed.
The Papacy was the formal victor of this contest, clamorously orchestrating the struggle against the Imperial ‘Anti-Christ’ and his progeny. But the ideological and diplomatic role of successive popes – Alexander III, Innocent IV and Urban IV – in the attack on Hohenstaufen power in Italy, never corresponded to the real political or military strength of the Papacy. For a long time, the Holy See had lacked even the modest administrative resources of a mediaeval princedom: it was not until the 12th century, after the Investiture Conflict with the Empire in Germany, that the Papacy acquired a normal court machinery comparable to that of the secular states of the epoch, with the constitution of the Curia Romana.5 Thereafter, Papal power followed curiously divergent paths, along its dual ecclesiastical and secular tracks. Within the universal Church itself, the Papacy gradually built up an autocratic, centralist authority whose prerogatives far surpassed those of any temporal monarchy of the epoch. The ‘plenitude of power’ accorded to the Pope was wholly unlimited by normal feudal constraints – estates or councils. Clerical benefices throughout Christendom came to be controlled by it; legal transactions were concentrated in its courts; a general income tax on the clergy was successfully imposed.6 At the same time, however, the position of the Papacy as an Italian State remained extremely weak and ineffectual. Enormous efforts were invested by successive Popes in the attempt to consolidate and expand the ‘Patrimony of Peter’ in Central Italy. But the mediaeval Papacy failed to establish any secure or reliable control even of the modest region under its nominal suzerainty. The small hill-towns of Umbria and the Marche vigorously resisted Papal intervention in their government, while the city of Rome itself was often troublesome or disloyal.7 No viable bureaucracy was created to administer the Papal State, whose internal condition was consequently for long periods very ragged and anarchic. The fiscal receipts of the Patrimony amounted to a mere 10 per cent of the total income of the Papacy; the cost of maintaining and protecting it was probably for most of the time much greater than the revenues it yielded. The military service owed by Papal subjects – towns and feudatories of the Pontifical territory – was equally inadequate to cover the defense needs it involved.8 Financially and militarily, the Papal State as an Italian principality was a deficitary unit. Arrayed alone against the Regno in the South, it had no chance.
The basic reason for the failure of the Hohenstaufen drive to unify the peninsula lay elsewhere – in the decisive economic and social superiority of Northern Italy, which had twice the population of the South and the overwhelming majority of the productive urban centres of trade and manufacture. The Kingdom of Sicily had only 3 towns of over 20,000 inhabitants: the North had more than 20.9 The cereal exports which furnished the main wealth of the South were, in fact, an indirect symptom of the commercial predominance of the North. For it was the thriving Communes of Lombardy, Liguria and Tuscany which imported grain because of their advanced division of labour and demographic concentration, while the surpluses of the Mezzogiorno were conversely the sign of a thinly settled countryside. The resources of the Communes were thus always much greater than those the Emperor was able to mobilize in Italy, although they were often divided, while their very existence as autonomous city republics was menaced by the prospect of a unitary peninsular monarchy. The initial Hohenstaufen attempt to enforce Imperial sovereignty in Italy, Frederick I’s descent across the Alps from Germany in the 12th century, had been resoundingly rebuffed by the Lombard League, with the great victory of its urban militias over Barbarossa’s army at Legnano in 1160. With the transfer of the dynastic base of Hohenstaufen power from Germany to Sicily, and the implantation of Frederick II’s centralized monarchy on South Italian soil, the danger to the Communes of royal and seigneurial absorption increased proportionately. Once again, it was essentially the Lombard cities, led by Milan, which frustrated the advance into the North of the Emperor, flanked by his feudal allies in Savoy and the Veneto. After his death, Manfred’s recovery of the Ghibelline position was challenged most effectively in Tuscany. The Guelf bankers of Florence, exiled after Montaperti, were the financial architects of the final ruin of the Hohenstaufen cause. It was their massive loans – some 200,000 livres tournois were made available in all – which alone made possible the Angevin conquest of the Regno;10 while at the battles of Benevento and Tagliacozzo, it was the Florentine cavalry which helped to give the French armies their winning margin. In the long struggle against the spectre of a unified Italian monarchy, the Papacy regularly supplied the anathemas; it was the Communes which provided the funds and – until the very end – most of the troops. The Lombard and Tuscan towns proved strong enough to stifle any territorial regroupment on a rural-feudal basis. On the other hand, they were inherently incapable of achieving any peninsular unification themselves: merchant capital had no possibility whatever of dominating a social formation of national dimensions at this date. Thus while the Lombard League could victoriously defend the North against Imperial invasions, it was not itself capable of conquering the feudal South: French knights had to launch the attack on the Kingdom of Sicily. Logically enough, it was not the Tuscan or Lombard cities which inherited the South, but Angevin nobles – the necessary instrument of urban victory, who appropriated its fruits. Soon afterwards, the revolt of the Sicilian Vespers against French rule ended the integrity of the old Regno itself. The baronial territories of the South split apart between warring Angevin and Aragonese claimants in a confused mêlée, whose ultimate result was to finish off any further prospect of a Southern mastery of Italy. The Papacy, now a mere hostage to France, was deported to Avignon, evacuating the peninsula altogether for half a century.
The towns of the North and Centre were thus freed for their own, bewitching political and cultural development. The simultaneous eclipse of the Empire and the Papacy made Italy the weak link of Western feudalism: from the mid 14th century to the mid 16th century, the cities between the Alps and the Tiber lived out the revolutionary historical experience that men themselves termed a ‘Renaissance’ – the rebirth of the civilization of classical Antiquity, after the intervening darkness of the ‘Middle Ages’. The radical reversal of time implied in these definitions, in contradiction of all evolutionary or religious chronology, has provided the foundation of the categoric structures of European historiography ever since: the age which posterity was to regard as a basic dividing-line of the past, itself drew the boundaries that separated it from its predecessors, and demarcated its remote from its immediate antecedence – a unique cultural achievement. No real sense of distance had separated the Middle Ages from Antiquity; it had always regarded the classical era simply as its own natural extension backwards into a still unredeemed, pre-Christian world. The Renaissance discovered itself with a new, intense consciousness of rupture and loss.11 Antiquity was far in the past, cut off from it by all the obscurity of the medium aevum between them, and yet far in advance of the crude barbarism which had prevailed throughout the supervening centuries. Petrarch’s passionate call, at the threshold of the new age, proclaimed the vocation of the future: ‘This slumber of forgetfulness will not last forever: after the darkness has been dispelled, our grandsons will be able to walk back into the pure radiance of the past.’ The poignant awareness of a long break and relapse after the fall of Rome was combined with a fierce determination to achieve once more the paragon standard of the ancients. The recreation of the classical world was to be the superb innovation and ideal of the modern. The Italian Renaissance thus witnessed a deliberate revival and imitation of one civilization by another, across its entire range of civic and cultural life, without example or sequel in history. Roman law and Roman magistracies had already resurfaced in the later mediaeval communes: Quiritary property had everywhere left its stamp on the economic relations of the Italian towns, while Latinate consuls replaced episcopal authorities as their rulers. Plebeian tribunes soon provided the model for Captains of the People in the Italian cities. The advent of the Renaissance proper, bringing with it the new sciences of archaeology, epigraphy and textual criticism to illuminate the classical past, suddenly extended the remembrance and emulation of Antiquity on an enormous, explosive scale. Architecture, painting, sculpture, poetry, history, philosophy, political and military theory all vied to recover the liberty or beauty of works once consigned to oblivion. Alberti’s churches were derived from his study of Vitruvius; Mantegna drew in emulation of Apelles; Piero di Cosimo painted panels inspired by Ovid; Petrarch’s odes were based on Horace; Guicciardini learnt his irony from Tacitus; Ficino’s spiritualism descended from Plotinus; Machiavelli’s discourses were a commentary on Livy, his dialogues on war an appeal to Vegetius.
The Renaissance civilization that resulted in Italy was of such iridescent vitality that it still seems a true repeal of that of Antiquity, the only one. Their commorr historical setting in city-state systems naturally provided the objective basis of the suggestive illusion of correspondent incarnations. The parallels between the urban flowering of classical Antiquity and the Italian Renaissance were striking enough. Both were originally the product of autonomous city-republics, composed of municipally-conscious citizens. Both were dominated at the outset by nobles, and in both the majority of the early citizenry owned landed property in the rural territory surrounding the city.12 Both were, of course, intense centres of commodity exchange. The same sea provided the main commercial routes of each.13 Both exacted military service from their citizens, cavalry or infantry according to property qualifications. Even some of the political singularites of the Greek poleis had their close counterpart in the Italian communes: the very high proportion of citizens who held temporary office in the State, or the use of sortition for selecting magistrates.14 All these shared characteristics appeared to form a kind of partial super-imposition of one historical form on the other. In reality, of course, the whole socio-economic natures of the Ancient and Renaissance city-states were profoundly different. Mediaeval towns were, as we have seen, urban enclaves within the feudal mode of production, structurally permitted by its parcellization of sovereignty; they essentially existed in dynamic tension with the countryside, where ancient cities were largely an emblematic resumption of it. The Italian towns started as market centres, dominated by petty nobles and populated with semi-peasants, often combining rural and urban occupations, cultivation with crafts. But they had rapidly assumed a pattern utterly distinct from their classical forebears. Merchants, bankers, manufacturers or lawyers came to form the patrician elite of the city-republics, while the basic mass of the citizenry were soon artisans – in polar contrast to ancient towns where the dominant class was always a landowning aristocracy, and the bulk of the citizenry were yeomen farmers or dispossessed plebeians, and where slaves constituted the great under-class of immediate producers excluded from citizenship altogether.15 Mediaeval cities not merely and naturally made no use of slave-labour in domestic industry or agriculture:16 they typically banned even serfdom within their precincts, too. The entire economic orientation of the two urban civilizations was thus in key respects antipodal. While both represented advanced focal points of commodity exchange, Italian towns were fundamentally centres of urban production, whose internal organization was based on craft guilds, while Ancient cities had always been primarily centres of consumption, articulated in clan or territorial associations.17 The division of labour and technical level of manufacturing industries in the Renaissance cities – textile or metallurgical – was consequently far more developed than that of Antiquity, as was maritime transport. Mercantile and banking capital, always lamed in the classical world by the absence of the necessary financial institutions to ensure its secure accumulation, now expanded vigorously and freely with the advent of the joint-stock company, bill of exchange and double-account book-keeping: the device of the public debt, unknown to ancient cities, increased both State revenues and investment outlets for urban rentiers.
Above all, the completely distinct bases of slave and feudal modes of production were evident in the diametrically opposite relations between town and country in each. The cities of the classical world formed an integral civic and economic unity with their rural milieu. The municipia included indistinctly both the urban centre and its agrarian periphery, and juridical citizenship was common to both. Slave labour linked the productive system of each, and there was no specifically urban economic policy as such: the town essentially functioned simply as a consumer agglomeration for agrarian produce and landed rents. The Italian cities, by contrast, were sharply separated from their countryside: the rural contado was typically a subject territory, whose inhabitants had no rights of citizenship in the polity. Its name, indeed, came to furnish the familiar, contemptuous term for ‘peasants’ – contadini. The communes customarily combated certain basic institutions of agrarian feudalism: vassalage was often expressly banned within the towns, and serfdom was abolished in the countryside controlled by them. At the same time, the Italian cities systematically exploited their contado for urban profit and production, levying grain and recruits from it, fixing prices and imposing meticulous crop regulations and directives on the subjugated agricultural population.18 These anti-rural policies were part and parcel of the city-republics of the Renaissance, whose economic dirigisme was quite foreign to their predecessors of Antiquity. The fundamental means of expansion of the classical town was warfare. Booty in treasure, land and labour were the economic goals pursuable within the slave mode of production, and the internal structure of the Greek and Roman cities largely followed from this: the military vocation of hoplites or assidui was central to their whole municipal constitution. Armed aggression was constant among the Italian communes, but it never acquired equivalent primacy. The State eluded a comparable military definition, because competition in trade and manufactures – escorted and enforced by extra-economic coercion, the ‘protection costs’ of the age19 – had become an economic purpose of the community in its own right: markets and loans were more important than prisoners, plunder was secondary to engrossment. The cities of the Italian Renaissance, as their ultimate fate was to show, were complex commercial and industrial organisms, whose capacity as landed or even naval belligerents was to prove relatively limited.
These great socio-economic contrasts inevitably found their reflection within the cultural and political florescence in which the city-states of Antiquity and the Renaissance seemed to converge most closely. The free craft substructure of the Renaissance cities, where manual labour in the guilds was never tainted with servile social degradation, produced a civilization in which the plastic and visual arts of painting, sculpture and architecture occupied an absolutely predominant position. Sculptors and painters were themselves organized in artisan guilds, and initially enjoyed the median social position accorded to analogous trades: eventually, they were to attain an honour and prestige immeasurably greater than that of their Greek or Roman predecessors. The nine muses of the classical world had significantly omitted the visual arts altogether.20 Sensuous imagination was the supreme domain of the Renaissance, yielding an artistic wealth and profusion that trumped Antiquity itself, as contemporaries themselves proudly became aware. On the other hand, the intellectual and theoretical achievements of Renaissance culture in Italy were much more restricted. Literature, philosophy and science – ranged in descending order of contribution – produced no body of works comparable to that of Ancient civilization. The slave basis of the classical world, divorcing manual from cerebral labour far more radically than mediaeval civilization had ever done, produced a leisured landed class remote from the affaire patriciate of the city-states of Italy. Words and numbers, in their abstraction, were more native to the classical universe: images took precedence at its rebirth. Literary and philosophical ‘humanism’, with its secular and scholarly enquiries, was always confined to a fragile and narrow intellectual elite during the Italian Renaissance;21 science made its brief and isolated debut only in the aftermath. The aesthetic vitality of the towns had much deeper civic roots, and would survive them both: Galileo was to expire in solitude and silence, while Bernini emblazoned the capital and court that had disbarred him.
The political evolution of the Renaissance towns, however, diverged still more than their cultural configuration from that of their Ancient prototypes. Up to a certain point, there were marked formal analogies between the two. After the eviction of episcopal rule – a pre-history that might be compared with the overthrow of royal rule in Antiquity – the Italian towns were dominated by landed aristocrats. The resultant consular regimes soon gave way to oligarchic government with an external podesta system, which was then assailed by the more prosperous plebeian guilds, who created their own civic counter-institutions; while eventually the top stratum of guild-masters, notaries and merchants who led the struggle of the popólo coalesced with the urban nobility above them, to form a single municipal bloc of privilege and power, repressing or manipulating the artisan mass beneath them. The exact shape and composition of these struggles varied from city to city, and the political evolution of different towns might abridge or extend their sequence. In Venice, the mercantile patriciate confiscated the fruits of a craftsmen’s rebellion against the old aristocracy very early on, and blocked any further political development by a rigid closure of its ranks: the serrata of 1297 checked any emergence of a popolo. In Florence, on the other hand, famished wage-earners, a miserable proletariat below the artisan class, revolted in their turn against a neo-conservative guild government in 1378, before being crushed. But in most of the cities, urban republics with extensive formal suffrages emerged, which were in fact ruled by restricted groups of bankers, manufacturers, merchants and landlords, whose common denominator was no longer birth but wealth, the possession of mobile or fixed capital. The Italian sequence of bishopric to consulate and podesteria to popolo, and the ‘mixed’ constitutional systems that were its outcome, is obviously reminiscent in some ways of the trajectory from monarchy to aristocracy and oligarchy to democracy or tribunate, and its complex results, in the classical world. But there was one clear and critical difference between the two orders of succession. In Antiquity, tyrannies had typically supervened between aristocratic and popular constitutions, as transitional systems for enlarging the social bases of the polity: they were a prelude to a wider franchise and freer agora. In the Renaissance, by contrast, tyrannies closed the whole parade of civic forms: the signorie were the last episode in the evolution of the city-republics, and signified their final fall to an aristocratic authoritarianism.
The ultimate upshot of the Ancient and Renaissance city-states, in fact, reveals perhaps more than anything else in their history the deep gulf between them. The municipal republics of the classical epoch could give birth to universal empires, without any basic break in their social continuity, because territorial expansionism was a natural prolongation of their agrarian and military bent. The countryside was always the incontestable axis of their existence: they were therefore in principle perfectly adapted to ever greater annexations of it, their economic growth resting on the successful conduct of war, which had always been a central civic purpose. Military conquest thus proved a comparatively straightforward gangway from republican to imperial states, and the latter could come to seem something like a predestined terminus. The Renaissance cities, on the other hand, were always fundamentally towns at variance with the countryside: their laws of motion were centred in the urban economy itself, whose relation to its rural environment was one of structural antagonism. The advent of the signorie – princely dictatorships with a pervasive agrarian background – thus ushered in no further cycle of major political or economic growth. Rather they concluded the fortunes of the Italian cities altogether. For the Renaissance republics had no chance of a career of imperial conquest and unification: precisely because they were so quintessentially urban, they could never reassemble and command whole feudal social formations, still massively dominated by the country. There was no economic passage for them to political aggrandisement on a peninsular scale. Moreover, their military forces were radically inadequate for such a task. The emergence of the signoria as an institutional form was a presage of their future impasse.
North and Central Italy formed an exceptional zone within the European economy of the later Middle Ages – the most advanced and thriving region in the West, as we have seen. The apogee of the Communes, in the 13th century, was an age of vigorous urban boom and demographic growth. This early lead gave Italy a peculiar position in the subsequent economic development of the continent. Like every other West European country, it was ravaged by the depopulation and depression of the 14th century: commercial regression and banking failures both cut back manufacturing output and probably stimulated building investment, diverting capital into sumptuary expenditure and real estate. The trajectory of the Italian economy in the 15th century is more obscure.22 The drastic fall in output of woollen textiles was now offset by a switch into production of silks, although the extent of the compensatory effects remains difficult to assess. A renewed growth in population and production may still have left overall levels of economic activity below the peak of the 13th century. Nevertheless, it seems probable that the city-states weathered the general crisis of European feudalism better than any other area in the West. The general resilience of the urban sector and the relative modernity of the agrarian sector, at least in Lombardy, perhaps allowed Northern Italy to recover economic impetus some half a century ahead of the rest of Western Europe, towards 1400. Now, however, the fastest demographic gains seem to have been located in the countryside rather than the towns, and capital investment tended to become increasingly oriented towards the land.23 The quality of manufactures became increasingly sophisticated, with a shift into elite goods; the silk and glass industries were among the most dynamic sectors of urban production in this epoch. Moreover, for another hundred years thereafter, revived European demand sustained Italian luxury exports at high levels. Yet there were to be fatal limits to the commercial and industrial prosperity of the towns.
For the guild organization which set the Renaissance towns off from classical cities posed in its turn inherent restrictions to the development of capitalist industry in Italy. The craft corporations blocked the full separation of direct producers from the means of production that was the precondition of the capitalist mode of production as such, within the urban economy: they were defined by the persistent unity of the artisan and his tools, which could not be broken within this framework. The woollen textile industry, in certain advanced centres such as Florence, achieved to some extent a proto-factory organization based on wage-labour proper; but the norm in cloth manufactures always remained the putting-out system under the control of merchant capital. In sector after sector, craftsmen tightly grouped in guilds regulated their methods and tempo of work according to corporate traditions and customs, which presented formidable obstacles to progress in technique and exploitation. Venice developed the latest and most competitive woollen-cloth industry in Italy in the 16th century, when it captured markets from Florence and Milan – perhaps the most notable commercial success of the time. Yet even in Venice, craft corporations also eventually proved an insuperable barrier to technical progress: there too, ‘it may be said that the entire body of guild legislation was aimed at preventing any sort of innovation.’24 Manufacturing capital proper was thus held within a constricted space, with little possibility of enlarged reproduction: competition from freer, rurally-located industries abroad, with lower costs of production, would eventually ruin it. Mercantile capital flourished longer, because trade was subject to no such fetters; but it too eventually paid the penalty of relative technical inertia, when maritime dominance passed from Mediterranean to Atlantic shipping with the advent of faster and cheaper forms of sea-transport developed by the Dutch and English.25 Banking capital maintained its profit levels longest of all, because it was most dissociated from the material processes of production. Yet its parasitic dependence on international courts and armies made it peculiarly vulnerable to their vicissitudes. The careers of Florence, Venice and Genoa – victims of English or French cloths, Portuguese or Anglo-Dutch shipping, and Spanish bankruptcies – were to illustrate these successive contingencies. The economic lead of the Renaissance towns of Italy proved a precarious one. At the same time, the political stabilization of the republican oligarchies which generally emerged from the struggles between the patriciates and guilds often proved difficult: the social resentments of the mass of artisans and city poor always remained just below the surface of municipal life, ready to explode again in new crises, whenever the established circle of the powerful became factionally divided.26 Finally, the great growth in the scale and intensity of war with the advent of field artillery and professional pike infantry rendered the modest defense capabilities of small city-states increasingly outmoded. The Italian republics became ever more militarily vulnerable as the size and fire-power of European armies in the early modern epoch developed. These conjoint strains, visible in different degrees at different times in the Northern and Central cities, set the stage for the rise of the signorie.
The social backdrop of these parvenu lordships over the towns lay in the feudal hinterlands of the countryside. The network of communes had never covered the North and Centre of the peninsula entirely; large rural interstices, dominated by seigneurial nobles, had always persisted between them. They had provided much of the aristocratic support for the Hohenstaufen campaigns against the Guelf towns, and the origin of the signorie can be traced back to the noble allies or lieutenants of Frederick II in the less urbanized regions of Saluzzo or the Veneto.27 In the Romagna, the very expansion of communes into the countryside, by the creation of a subject contado, led to the conquest of the cities by rural lords whose territories were incorporated in them.28 Most of the early tyrants throughout the North were feudatories or condottieri, who seized power through their tenure of the podesteria or capitaneria of the cities; in many cases, they enjoyed temporary popular sympathy because of their suppression of hated municipal oligarchies, or their restoration of civic order after endemic outbreaks of factional violence between the previous ruling families. Nearly always, they brought or created an enlarged military apparatus, better adapted to the modern necessities of war. Their provincial conquests then tended by themselves to increase the weight of the rural component of the city-states which they now governed.29
For the link of the signorie with the land from which they drew troops and revenues remained a close one, as the pattern of their spread testified. Originating in the more backward ‘wings’ of Northern Italy, along the Alpine passes in the West and the Po delta in the East, princely power moved to the sophisticated centre of the political scene-with the Visconti capture of Milan – once the communal soul of the Lombard League – in the late 13th century. Milan thereafter always represented the most stable and powerful princedom of the major Italian cities, because of the specific internal composition of the State. It was neither a maritime port, nor a major manufacturing centre, its industries being numerous and prosperous but also small and fragmented; on the other hand, it possessed the most advanced agricultural zone in Italy, with the irrigated meadows of the Lombard plain, and one which was to resist the agrarian depression of the 14th century probably better than any other region in Europe. Milan, the most rural in wealth of the large Italian cities, was the natural spring-board for the first internationally significant signoria in the North. By the end of the 13th century, most of Italy above the Apennines had fallen to petty lords or military adventurers. Tuscany resisted for another hundred years, but in the course of the 15th century it too succumbed to gilded tyrannies. Florence, the greatest manufacturing and banking centre of the peninsula, eventually slid into the smooth hereditary fist of the Medici, although not without recidivist republican episodes: the diplomatic and military protection of the Sforza rulers of Milan,30 and later the pressure of Medici popes in Rome, was necessary to ensure the final victory of a princely regime in Florence. In Rome itself, the rule of the Delia Rovere pope Julius II in the early 16th century for the first time pressed the political and military structure of the Papal State into a form close to that of the rival powers beyond the Tiber. Predictably, the two marine republics, Venice and Genoa, alone withstood the onset of the new type of court and prince – safeguarded by the relative lack of rural belts surrounding them. The Venetian serrata, however, produced a tiny hereditary clique of rulers that froze the political development of the city thereafter, and proved incapable of integrating the mainland possessions which the Republic came to acquire into any modern or unitary State.31 The Genoese patriciate, mercenary and asocial, survived in the car of Hispanic imperialism. Everywhere else, most of the city-republics disappeared.
Culturally, of course, the Renaissance reached its apogee in this final act of Italian urban civilization, before what came to be seen as the new barbarian’ invasions from the other side of the Alps and the Mediterranean. The princely and clerical patronage of the new and gorgeous courts of the peninsula invested lavishly in arts and letters: architecture, sculpture, painting, philology and history were all beneficiaries, in the conservatory warmth of an overtly aristocratic climate of erudition and etiquette. Economically, the creeping stagnation of technique and enterprise was concealed by the boom in the rest of Western Europe, which continued to expand demand for Italian luxury goods after domestic manufactures had ceased to innovate, and assured the ostentatious wealth of the signorie. But politically, the potential of these sub-regal states proved very limited. The mosaic of communes in the North and Centre had given way to a smaller number of consolidated urban tyrannies, which then engaged in constant wars and intrigues against each other to gain predominance in Italy. But none of the five major states in the peninsula – Milan, Florence, Venice, Rome and Naples – had the strength to overcome the others, or even to absorb the numerous lesser principalities and towns. The penning back of Gian Galeazzo Visconti into Lombardy, by the combined pressure of his foes at the turn of the 15th century, marked the end of the most successful bid for paramountcy. The ceaseless political and military rivalry between middle-strength states eventually reached a precarious equilibrium with the Treaty of Lodi in 1451. By that date, the Renaissance cities had already developed the basic instruments of secular state-craft and aggression which they were to bequeath to European Absolutism – a heritage whose enormous importance has already been seen. Fiscal impositions, funded debts, sale of offices, foreign embassies, espionage agencies – all these were pioneered in the Italian city-states, in a kind of reduced-scale rehearsal of the great international state-system and its conflicts to come.32
Nevertheless, the regime of the signorie could not alter the basic parameters of the deadlock in Italian political development that had set in after the defeat of the project of a unitary imperial monarchy in the Hohenstaufen epoch. The communes had been structurally incapable of achieving the unification of the peninsula, because of the very precocity of their urban-commercial development. The signorie represented a political reassertion of the rural and seigneurial circum-ambience within which they had always been inserted. But no real social victory of the countryside over the towns was ever possible in Northern and Central Italy: the attractive strength of the cities was much too great, while the local landowning class never formed a cohesive feudal nobility with an ancestral tradition or esprit de corps. The lords who usurped power in the republics were frequently mercenaries, upstarts or adventurers, while others were elevated bankers or merchants. The sovereignty of the signoria was consequently always in a deep sense illegitimate:33 it rested on recent force and personal fraud, without any collective social sanction in aristocratic hierarchy or duty behind it. The new princedoms had extinguished the civic vitality of the republican towns; but they could not rely on the loyalty or discipline of a seigneuralized countryside. Thus despite their often apparently outri modernism of means and techniques, their famous inauguration of pure ‘power politics, as such, the signorie were in fact inherently unable to generate the characteristic State form of the early modern epoch, a unitary royal Absolutism.
It was the turbid historical experience of these lordships that produced the political theory of Machiavelli. Conventionally presented as the acme of modern Realpolitik, forecasting the practice of the secular monarchies of Absolutist Europe, it was in fact an idealized programme for an all-Italian, or perhaps merely Central Italian, signoria, on the eve of the historical supersession of this form.34 Machiavelli’s alert intelligence was aware of the distance between the dynastic States of Spain or France and the provincial tyrannies of Italy. He noted that the French monarchy was surrounded by a powerful aristocracy and based on a venerated legitimacy: its distinctive traits were the prominence of autonomous ‘nobles’ and traditional ‘laws’. ‘The king of France is surrounded by a time-honoured company of nobles, who are acknowledged and loved by their own subjects; they have their prerogatives, and the king cannot deprive them of these except at his own peril. . . . The kingdom of France is more regulated by laws than any other of which we have knowledge today.’35 But he failed to comprehend that the strength of the new territorial monarchies lay in precisely this combination of a feudal nobility and constitutional legality; he believed the French parlements were merely a royal facade for the intimidation of the aristocracy and the placation of the masses.36 For Machiavelli’s aversion to aristocracy was so intense and general that he could declare a landed gentry incompatible with any stable or viable political order whatever: ‘Those states whose political life remains uncorrupted do not permit any of their citizens to be gentry, or to live after the fashion of gentry. . . . To clarify the term, I will say that by “gentry” are meant those who live idly on the abundant incomes yielded by their estates, without playing any role in cultivation or performing any other tasks necessary to life. Such men are pernicious in any republic and in any province; but still more maleficent are those who, in addition to the rents from their estates, control castles and command subjects who obey them. . . . Men of this stamp are wholly inimical to any form of civic government.’37 Wistfully glancing at the German cities that had no seigneurial periphery at all,38 he kept a certain nostalgic republicanism, compounded of fading memories of the Republic of Soderini that he had served, and of antiquarian reverence for the heroic age of Rome recorded by Livy.
But Machiavelli’s republicanism in the Discourses was at bottom sentimental and occasional. For all political regimes were dominated by a small inner circle of power: ‘In all states, whatever their type of government, the real rulers are never more than forty or fifty citizens.’39 The great mass of the population below this elite cared only for its own safety: ‘the overwhelming majority of those who demand freedom, merely desire to live in security.’ Successful government could always suppress traditional liberties, so long as it left the property and family of its subjects intact; it should, if anything, seek to promote their economic enterprises, since these would contribute to its own resources. ‘A prince can always inspire fear yet avoid hatred if he abstains from the property of his subjects and citizens and from their women.’40 These maxims were indifferently true of any political system – principality or republic. Republican constitutions, however, were adapted only for endurance: they could preserve an existent polity, but not inaugurate a new one.41 To found an Italian State capable of resisting the barbarian invaders from France, Switzerland and Spain, the concentrated will and ruthless energy of a single prince was necessary. Machiavelli’s real passion lay here. His prescriptions were essentially addressed to the future architect of a – necessarily parvenu – peninsular lordship. The Prince declares at the outset that it will examine the two types of principality, ‘hereditary’ and ‘new’, and it never quite loses sight of the distinction between them. But the burning preoccupation of the treatise, which dominates its actual content throughout, is essentially the creation of a new princedom, a task which Machiavelli ends by expressly pronouncing to be the greatest achievement of any ruler: ‘A new prince, if he carefully observes the lessons set out above, will take on the appearance of a traditional ruler and his government will soon become safer and firmer than if he had been long entrenched in it. For the deeds of a new prince attract much more notice than those of a hereditary ruler; and when his actions are of valour, they captivate and bind men far more than royal blood. . . . The new Prince will have a two-fold glory/42
This covert imbalance of focus is evident throughout the book. Thus Machiavelli states that the two main foundations of government are ‘good laws’ and ‘good arms’; but he promptly adds that since coercion creates legality, and not vice-versa, he will consider only coercion. ‘The main foundations of every state – new or ancient or composite – are good laws and good arms; and since there cannot be good laws without good arms, and where there are good arms there must be good laws, I will not consider laws but speak of arms.’43 In perhaps the most famous passage of the Prince, he repeats the same revealing conceptual slide. Law and force are the respective modes of conduct natural to men and beasts, he asserts, and a prince should be a ‘centaur’, combining both. But in practice the princely ‘combination’ he discusses is not that of the centaur, half-man and half-beast, but – by immediate slippage – that of two beasts, the ‘lion’ and the ‘fox’ – force and fraud. ‘There are two ways of fighting: by law or by force. The first is proper to men, and the second to beasts; but as the first way is often inadequate, recourse is necessary to the second. Thus a prince must know how to make good use of the beast and the man. The ancient writers instructed princes in this lesson by an allegory: they told how Achilles and many other rulers of antiquity were given in infancy to the centaur, Chiron, to be reared and trained by him. The meaning of this story of a teacher who is half beast and half man, is that a prince must acquire the nature of both; if he possesses the qualities of one without the other, he will be lost. Therefore, as a prince is obliged to know how to act like a beast, he should learn from the fox and the lion. . . .’44 For fear is always preferable to affection in subjects; violence and deception are superior to legality in controlling them. ‘One can say this in general of men: they are ungrateful, disloyal, insincere and deceitful, timid of danger and avid of profit. . . . Love is a bond of obligation which these miserable creatures break whenever it suits them to do so; but fear holds them fast by a dread of punishment that never passes.’45
These summary precepts were, in effect, the house rules of the petty tyrannies of Italy: they were remote from the realities of the much more complex ideological and political structure of class power in the new monarchies of Western Europe. Machiavelli had little understanding of the immense historical strength of dynastic legitimacy, in which emergent Absolutism was rooted. His world was that of the transient adventurers and upstart tyrants of the Italian signorie; his cynosure Cesare Borgia. The result of the studied ‘illegitimism’ of Machiavelli’s outlook was his famous ‘technicism’, the advocacy of morally unsanctioned means for the attainment of conventional political ends, dissociated from ethical restraints and imperatives. The conduct of a Prince could only be a catalogue of perfidy and crime, once all stable juridical and social bases of dominion were dissolved, aristocratic solidarity and fealty annulled. To later epochs, this stripping away of feudal or religious ideology from the practical exercise of power, seemed to be the secret, and greatness, of Machiavelli’s modernity.46 But in fact his political theory, apparently so modern in its intention of clinical rationality, significantly lacked any secure, objective concept of the State at all. There is a constant wavering of vocabulary in his writings, in which the terms città, governo, república or stato alternate uncertainly, but all tend to become subordinate to the notion which gave its name to his central work – principe, the ‘prince’ who could be master either of a ‘republic’ or a ‘principality’.47 Machiavelli never fully separated the personal ruler who could in principle parachute anywhere at will (Cesare Borgia or his counterparts) and the impersonal structure of a political order with territorial fixity.48 The functional inter-connection between the two in the age of Absolutism was real enough: but Machiavelli, by failing to grasp the necessary social bond between monarchy and nobility which mediated it, tended to reduce his notion of the State simply to that of the passive property of the individual prince, accessory ornament of his will. The consequence of this voluntarism was the curious, central paradox of Machiavelli’s work – his constant denunciation of mercenaries and strenuous advocacy of an urban militia as the only military organization capable of executing the projects of a strong Prince, who could be the author of a new Italy. This is the theme of the vibrant closing call of his most celebrated work, addressed to the Medici. ‘Mercenaries and auxiliaries are useless and dangerous . . . they have led Italy into slavery and ignominy’ – ‘therefore if your illustrious House wants to emulate those celebrated men who saved their countries, it must before all else raise its own army.’49 Machiavelli was later to devote the Art of War to arguing out his military case for a citizen army again at full length, buttressed with all the examples of Antiquity.
Machiavelli believed mercenaries to be the bane of Italian political weakness; and as Secretary of the Republic, he had himself tried to arm local peasants to defend Florence. In fact, of course, mercenaries were the precondition of the new royal armies beyond the Alps, while his neo-communal militia were routed by regular troops with the greatest of ease.50 The reason for his military error, however, went to the core of his political tenets. For Machiavelli confused the European mercenary with the Italian condottieri system: the difference was precisely that the condottieri in Italy owned their troops, auctioning them and switching them from side to side in local wars, while royal rulers beyond the Alps formed or contracted mercenary corps directly under their own control, to constitute the forerunner of permanent, professional armies. It was the combination of Machiavelli’s concept of the State as the adventitious property of the Prince, with his acceptance of adventurers as princes, that misled him into thinking the volatile condottieri were typical of mercenary warfare in Europe. What he failed to see was the power of dynastic authority, rooted in a feudal nobility, which rendered the use of household mercenary troops not only safe, but superior to any other military system then available. The logical incongruity of a citizen militia under a usurper tyranny, as a formula for the liberation of Italy, was merely a desperate sign of the historical impossibility of a peninsular signoria. Beyond it, there remained only the banal recipes of deceit and ferocity that came to bear the name of Machiavellianism.51 These counsels of the Florentine Secretary were merely a theory of political weakness: their technicism was an unseeing empiricism, incapable of identifying the deeper social causes of the events which it recorded, and confined to a vain surface manipulation of them, mephistophelean and Utopian.
Machiavelli’s work thus fundamentally reflected, in its inner structure, the final impasse of the Italian city-states, on the eve of their absorption. It remains the best guide to their eventual end. In Prussia and Russia, as will be seen, a super-Absolutism emerged above a void of towns. In Italy, and in Germany west of the Elbe, the density of towns produced a kind of ‘micro-absolutism’ only – a proliferation of petty princedoms that crystallized the divisions of the country. These miniature States were in no position to resist neighbouring feudal monarchies, and the peninsula was soon forcibly aligned with European norms by foreign conquerors. France and Spain joined issue for its control within the first decades of their respective political integration, in the last years of the 15th century. Unable to produce a national Absolutism from within, Italy was condemned to suffer an alien one from without. In the half century between Charles VIII’s march to Naples in 1494 and the defeat of Henri II at Saint Quentin in 1557, the Valois were checked by the Habsburgs and the prize fell to Spain. Henceforward, Spanish rule, anchored in Sicily, Naples and Milan, coordinated the Peninsula and domesticated the Papacy under the banner of the Counter-Reformation. Paradoxically, it was the economic advance of Northern Italy that condemned it to a long cycle of political backwardness thereafterwards. The eventual result, once Habsburg power had been consolidated, was economic retrogression too: a ruralization of the urban patriciates, which in their decadence abandoned finance or manufactures for investment in land. Hence the ‘hundred cities of silence’, to which Gramsci was to advert again and again.52 By a curious compression of historical epochs, it was ultimately to be the Piedmontese monarchy which achieved national unification, in the era of bourgeois revolutions in the West. In fact, Piedmont provided the logical base for this unification: for there alone a rigorous and indigenous Absolutism emerged, squarely founded on a feudal nobility in a social formation dominated by serfdom. The State constructed by Emanuele Filiberto and Carlo Emanuele in Savoy was economically rudimentary by comparison with Venice or Milan; precisely for that reason it proved to be the only territorial nucleus capable of later political advance.
Its geographical position astride the Alps was critical for this exceptional destiny. For it meant that for three centuries, Savoy could maintain its autonomy and enlarge its borders, by playing off the two major powers of the continent against each other – first France against Spain, then Austria against France. In 1460, on the eve of the foreign invasions which were to close the Renaissance, Piedmont was the only independent state in Italy with an influential Estates system53 – precisely, of course, because it was perhaps the most feudal social formation in the peninsula. The Estates were organized in a conventional three-curia system dominated by the nobility. The revenues of the ruling dukes were small and their authority limited, although the clergy, who owned a third of the land, were generally their allies. The Estates refused to grant subsidies for a permanent army. Then, in the 1530’s, French and Spanish troops occupied the Western and Eastern parts of Piedmont respectively. In the French zone, the Estates were maintained as provincial etats of the Valois realm, while in the Spanish they were suppressed from 1555 onwards. The French administration reorganized and modernized the archaic local polity; the beneficiary of their work was Duke Emanuele Filiberto. Educated in Spain and combatant in Flanders, this Habsburg ally and victor of Saint-Quentin regained the whole of his patrimony in 1559 with the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis. The vigorous and authoritarian Duke, Testa di Ferro to his contemporaries, summoned the Estates for the last time in 1560, raised a large grant for a standing army of 24,000, and then dismissed them for ever. Thereafter, the institutional innovations of thirty years of Valois rule were preserved and developed: executive Council of State, judicial parlements, royal lettere di giussione (i.e. lits de justice), unitary legal code, single coinage and a reorganized exchequer, sumptuary legislation. Quintupling his revenues, Emanuele Filiberto created a new and loyal court nobility by astute distribution of titles and offices. Under the rule of a Duke who was one of the first rulers in Europe to proclaim himself freed from all legislative restraints – Noi, come principi, siamo da ogni legge sciolti e liberi54 – Piedmont travelled rapidly towards an early princely centralization.
Henceforward the Piedmontese dynasty always tended to borrow the political forms and mechanics of French Absolutism, while resisting its territorial absorption into it. The 17th century, however, witnessed prolonged relapses into anarchic civil wars and noble feuds under weak rulers, graver and longer echoes of the Fronde. The multiple enclaves and uncertain frontiers of the State in a buffer region of Europe hampered firm ducal control of the Alpine uplands. Advance towards a centralized Absolutism was decisively resumed by Vittorio Emanuele II in the early 18th century. A skilful switch of sides in the War of the Spanish Succession, from France to Austria, secured Piedmont the county of Montferrat and the island of Sardinia, and European acknowledgment of its elevation from duchy to monarchy. Sinuous in war, Vittorio Emanuele used the succeeding peace to install a rigid administration modelled on that of Colbert, complete with Council and intendant system. He then de-enfiefed large tracts of noble land by a new cadastral register – the perequatone of 1731 – thereby increasing fiscal revenues, since allodial estates were liable for tax;55 built up a large military and diplomatic establishment into which the aristocracy was integrated; eliminated clerical immunities and subordinated the Church; and prosecuted a vigorous protectionist mercantilism, including the development of roads and canals, promotion of export manufactures, and construction of an aggrandized capital at Turin. His successor, Carlo Emanuele III, deftly allied with France against Austria in the War of the Polish Succession, to gain part of the Lombard plain, and then with Austria against France in the War of the Austrian Succession, to keep it. Piedmontese Absolutism was thus one of the most coherent and successful of the epoch. Like the two other Southern experiments of a strong, modernized Absolutism in small states – Tanucci’s regime in Naples and Pombal’s in Portugal – it was chronologically lagged: its creative peak was in the 18th, not the 17th century. But its pattern was otherwise closely similar to that of its larger mentors. Indeed, by the time of its apogee, Piedmontese Absolutism was spending proportionately more on its army, a skilled professional corps, than perhaps any other state in Western Europe.56 This aristocratic military apparatus was to be a gage for the future.

1. G. Masson, Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, London 1957, pp. 77–82.
2. For the justiciars, see E. Kantorowicz, Frederick the Second, London 1931, pp. 272–9.
3. Masson, Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, pp. 165–70.
4. Kantorowicz, Frederick the Second, pp. 487–91.
5. G. Barraclough, The Mediaeval Papacy, London 1958, pp. 93–100.
6. Barraclough, The Mediaeval Papacy, pp. 120–6.
7. D. Waley, The Papal State in the Thirteenth Century, London 1961, pp. 68–90, describes the nature and success of this urban recalcitrance.
8. Waley, The Papal State in the Thirteenth Century, pp. 273, 275, 295–6.
9. G. Procacci, Storia degli Italiani, I, Bari 1969, p. 34.
10. E. Jordan, Les Origines de la Domination Angévine en Italie, Paris 1909, II, pp. 547, 556. The Church had to pledge much of its fixed property in Rome as a collateral, to raise the necessary sums from Tuscan and Roman bankers for its French ally.
11. ‘The Middle Ages had left antiquity unburied and alternately galvanized and exorcised its corpse. The Renaissance stood weeping at its grave and tried to resurrect its soul. And in one fatally auspicious moment it succeeded.’ E. Panofsky, Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art, London 1970, p. 113 – the one great historical work on the rebirth of Antiquity, worthy of its subject. In general, the modern literature on the Italian Renaissance is curiously limited and flat: as if the very scale of its creations has tended to unnerve the historians who have approached it. The disproportion between the object and the studies of it is, of course, nowhere more evident than in the legacy of Marx and Engels themselves: always relatively indifferent to the visual arts (or music), neither of them were ever imaginatively engaged by the problems posed for historical materialism by the Renaissance as a total phenomenon. Panofsky’s book is purely aesthetic in focus: the entire economic, social and political history of the period remains outside it. Its quality and method nevertheless set the appropriate protocols for the work that has still to be accomplished across this whole field. Above all, Panofsky took more seriously than any other scholar has done, the retrospective relationship of the Renaissance to Antiquity, through which the age conceived itself: the classical world is an active pole of real comparison, not merely a vaguely aromatic nomenclature, in his writing. In the absence of this dimension, the political and economic history of the Italian Renaissance has yet to be written with similar depth.
12. D. Waley, The Italian City-Republics, London 1969, p. 24, reckons that in most towns of the later 13th century some ⅔ of the urban households owned land. It should be noted that this pattern was specifically Italian: neither the German nor Flemish towns of the same epoch contained comparable numbers of rural proprietors. Likewise, there was no real equivalent of the contado controlled by the cities of Lombardy and Tuscany, in Flanders or the Rhineland. The North European cities were always more exclusively urban in character. For a good discussion of the failure of the Flemish towns to annex their rural environment, see D. Nicholas, ‘Towns and Countryside: Social and Economic Tensions in Fourteenth-Century Flanders’, Comparative Studies in Society and History, X, No. 4, 1968, pp. 458–85.
13. Comparative costs were still massively weighted towards maritime transport. In the 15th century, cargoes could be shipped all the way from Genoa to Southampton for little more than a fifth of the price of lifting them by land the short distance from Geneva to Asti: J. Bernard, Trade and Finance in the Middle Ages 900–1500, London 1971, p. 46.
14. Waley, The Italian City-Republics, pp. 83–6, 63–4, 107–9, who estimates that perhaps a third of the citizens in a typical Italian commune held office in any given year.
15. These social antitheses were first systematically discussed by Weber, Economy and Society, III, pp. 1340–3. Despite Weber’s fluctuating grasp of the relationship between town and country in the Italian republics, the whole section entitled ‘Ancient and Mediaeval Democracy’, which concludes the work, remains the best and most original discussion of the question to this day. Subsequent advances in research have not on the whole been matched by comparable gains in synthesis.
16. The overseas colonies of Genoa and Venice in the Eastern Mediterranean did employ slave labour, on the sugar plantations of Crete or in the alum mines of Phocaea; and household servants were often slaves in these cities – mostly women, however, in contrast with those of Antiquity. In this sense, there was even a certain recrudescence of slavery; but it never acquired economic importance at home, within Italy. For the nature and limits of the phenomenon, see C. Verlinden, The Beginnings of Modern Colonization, Ithaca 1970, pp. 26–32.
17. Weber, Economy and Society, III, pp. 1343–7.
18. Waley, The Italian City-Republics, pp. 93–5.
19. The notion of ‘protection rent’ was developed by F. C. Lane, Venice and History, Baltimore 1966, pp. 373–428, to bring into relief the economic consequences of the characteristic fusion of warfare and business in the early trading and colonial ventures of the Italian city-states – both the aggressive raiding and piracy, and defensive guarding and convoying, which were inseparable from the commercial practice of the epoch.
20. Only music and poetry were admitted to their company, which otherwise decorated mainly what are today ‘sciences’ or ‘humanities’. See the notable discussion of the changing order and definition of the arts in P. O. Kristeller, Renaissance Thought, II, New York 1965, pp. 168–89.
21. ‘The two Germans who brought printing to Italy in 1465 and to Rome two years later, went bankrupt in 1471 simply because there was no market for their editions of the Latin classics. . . . Even when the Renaissance was its highest, its ideals were only intelligible to and cherished by a very small minority.’ R. Weiss, The Renaissance Discovery of Antiquity, Oxford 1969, pp. 205–6. Gramsci, of course, was intensely seized with this defect of his country’s cultural past: but like Marx and Engels before him, he had little plastic sensibility, and tended to see the Renaissance mainly or merely as a rarefied spiritual enlightenment.
22. Scholarly opinion is sharply divided on the problem of the overall economic balance-sheet of 15th century Italy. Lopez, supported by Miskimin, has argued that the Renaissance was essentially an epoch of depression: among other indices, the capital of the Medici Bank in mid 15th century Florence was only half that of the Peruzzi a hundred years earlier, while Genoese port dues in the early 16th century were still below those of the last decade of the 13th century. Cipolla has questioned the validity of general deductions from such evidence, and suggested that per capita production in Italy perhaps increased, together with the international division of labour. For the debate, see R. Lopez, ‘Hard Times and Investment in Culture’, reprinted in A. Molho (ed.), Social and Economic Foundations of the Renaissance, New York 1969, pp. 95–116; R. Lopez and H. Miskimin, ‘The Economic Depression of the Renaissance’, Economic History Review, XIV, No. 3, April 1962, pp. 408–26; C. Cipolla, ‘Economic Depression of the Renaissance?’, Economic History Review, XVI, No. 3, April 1964, pp. 519–24, with replies by Lopez and Miskimin, pp. 525–9. A more recent survey, covering the latter part of the 15th century and the early 16th century, presents a generally optimistic account of Italian trade, finance and manufactures: P. Laven, Renaissance Italy 1464–1534, London 1966, pp. 35–108.
23. C. M. Cipolla, ‘The Trends in Italian Economic History in the Later Middle Ages’, Economic History Review, II, No. 2, 1949, pp. 181–4.
24. C. M. Cipolla, ‘The Decline of Italy’, Economic History Review, V, No. 2, 1952, p. 183. The guilds in the cloth export industries maintained high levels of quality and resisted wage-reductions: their fabrics were never modified to adapt to changing fashions. The result was that Italian draperies, expensive and old-fashioned, were ultimately outpriced and driven from the market.
25. F. Lane, ‘Discussion’, Journal of Economic History, XXIV, December 1964, No. 4, pp. 466–7.
26. The multiplication of inter-urban political contacts and rivalries also played a major role in the emergence of the signorie in this epoch: ‘All the signorie of North Italy, all without exception, are born with the direct or indirect aid of forces extraneous to the city which is the theatre of the new lordship.’ E. Sestan, ‘Le Origini delle Signorie Cittadine: Un Problema Storico Esaurito?’, Bollettino dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo, No. 73, 1961, p. 57. For the example of Florence, see below.
27. Jordan, Les Origines de la Domination Angévine, I, pp. 68–72, 274.
28. J. Larner, The Lords of the Romagna, London 1965, pp. 14–17, 76.
29. The contrast between the Italian and German cities is in this respect particularly striking in the 15th century. The Rhenish and Swabian towns never possessed, as we shall see, the rural periphery which distinguished their counter-parts in Lombardy or Tuscany. Their economic hinterland, on the other hand, contained a mining complex – silver, copper, tin, zinc and iron – of a type that was quite absent in Italy, and produced a metallurgical industry much more dynamic than anything south of the Alps. Thus while the Italian cities were rife with artistic creations, the German towns of this epoch were the scene of the greatest cluster of technical inventions in Europe: printing, ore-refining, smelting, ordnance, clock-making – virtually all the key technological advances of the age were pioneered or perfected in the milieu of the German cities.
30. The suave discretion of Cosimo de Medici’s dominance of Florence, indirectly operated through electoral manipulation, corresponded to the comparative weakness of the social bases of the family’s rule. Lorenzo only acceded to power peacefully because of the threat of Milanese intervention if he did not. For the original character of Medici primacy in Florence, and its support from Milan, see N. Rubinstein, The Government of Florence under the Medici (1434–1494), Oxford 1966, pp. 128–35, 161, 175.
31. See the perceptive comments in Procacci, Storia degli Italiani, I, pp. 144–7.
32. See Mattingly, Renaissance Diplomacy, pp. 58–60.
33. The degree and type of this illegitimacy varied, of course; in the Romagna, local tyrants had gradually acquired a certain dynastic normalcy by the 15th century: Larner, The Lords of the Romagna, pp. 78, 154.
34. Chabod, the most lucid authority, judges that Machiavelli envisaged merely the latter, a strong princedom in Central Italy rather than a peninsular State: Scritti su Machiavelli, Turin 1965, pp. 64–7.
35. Niccolò Machiavelli, Il Principe e Discorsi sopra la Prima Deca de Tito Livio (Introduction by Giuliano Procacci), Milan 1960, pp. 26, 262: the best recent edition.
36. Il Principe e Discorsi, pp. 77–8. Machiavelli’s comprehension of the nature and role of the French nobility was, in fact, ultimately insecure and confused. In his Ritratto di Cose di Francia, he describes the French aristocracy as ‘utterly compliant’ (ossequentissimi) with the monarchy, in complete contradiction to his later remarks cited above. See Arte della Guerra e Scritti Politici Minori, Milan 1961, p. 164.
37. Il Principe e Discorsi, p. 256.
38. Ibid., pp. 255–6.
39. Ibid., p. 176.
40. Ibid., p. 70.
41. Ibid., p. 265.
42. Il Principe e Discorsi, p. 97. Compare the tone here with Bodin: ‘He who on his own authority makes himself a sovereign prince, without election, hereditary right, sortition, just war or special divine calling, is a tyrant.’ Such a ruler ‘tramples on the laws of nature’. Les Six Livres de la République, pp. 218, 211.
43. Il Principe e Discorsi, p. 53.
44. Il Principe e Discorsi, p. 72.
45. Il Principe e Discorsi, pp. 69–70.
46. Nor, of course, were they wrong. It was in a sense precisely Machiavelli’s lack of mooring in the mainswell of his own historical epoch which produced a political work of more general and perennial moment, after it had passed.
47. For examples, see Il Principe e Discorsi, pp. 129–31; 309–11; 355–7. See Chabod’s comments in ‘Alcuni Questioni di Terminologia: Stato, Nazione, Patria nel Linguaggio del Cinquecento’, L’Idea di Nazione, Bari 1967, pp. 145–53.
48. There are a few, fleeting passages in Machiavelli which indicate an awareness of the limits of his dominant conception of the state: ‘Governments erected in haste, like everything else in nature that is born and grows too quickly, lack firm roots and ramifications, and can be overturned by the first squall.’ Il Principe e Discorsi, p. 34. Procacci, in his able introduction, makes considerable play of the terms barbe e correspondenze (roots and ramifications), as evidence that Machiavelli did possess an objective notion of the princely state (Introduzione, pp. L ff). But what is actually most striking about this germane phrase is its general absence of consequences or echoes in The Prince as a whole.
49. Il Principe e Discorsi, pp. 53, 58, 104.
50. For this episode, see Oman, A History of War in the Sixteenth Century, pp. 96–7.
51. This aspect of Machiavelli’s work, which gave rise to his sensational ‘legend’ for subsequent centuries, is generally glided over by his more serious commentators today, as of little intellectual interest. In fact, it is conceptually inseparable from the theoretical structure of his work, and cannot be urbanely ignored: it is the necessary and logical residue of his thought. Much the best and most forceful discussion of the real meaning of ‘machiavellianism’ is by Georges Mounin, Machiavel, Paris 1966, pp. 202–12.
52. Passato e Presente, p. 98; Note sul Machiavelli, p. 7; Il Risorgimento, p. 95. The phrase was borrowed from D’Annunzio’s poem-cycle. Gramsci’s analyses of the problem of Italian unity in the Renaissance, with which he was profoundly concerned, suffer from an implicit assumption that the new European monarchies which were unifying France, England and Spain, were bourgeois in character (or at least balanced between bourgeoisie and aristocracy). He thus tends illegitimately to telescope the two distinct historical problems of the absence of a unitary Absolutism in the Renaissance and the subsequent lack of a radical democratic revolution in the Risorgimento. Both become the evidence of a failure of the Italian bourgeoisie, the first because of the corporatism and involution of the Communes in the later mediaeval and early modern epoch, the second because of the collusion of the Moderates with the Southern latifundists in the 19th century. In fact, as we have seen, the truth is the opposite. It was the absence of a dominant feudal nobility that prevented a peninsular Absolutism and hence a unitary state coeval with that of France or Spain; and it was the regional presence of such a nobility in Piedmont that permitted the creation of a State that would provide the trampolin for a belated unification in the era of industrial capitalism. Gramsci’s misapprehension largely reflects his reliance on Machiavelli as the central prism through which he viewed the Renaissance, and his belief that Machiavelli represented a ‘precocious Jacobinism’ (see especially Note sul Machiavelli, pp. 6–7, 14–16). For Machiavelli, in his own epoch, confused two distinct historical times – imagining that an Italian Prince could form a powerful autocratic state by recreating the citizen militias typical of the 12th century Communes, long since dead in his day.
53. Together with Sicily – which predictably was the other region with a powerful estates system, but was now part of the realm of Aragon: H. G. Koenigsberger, ‘The Parliament of Piedmont during the Renaissance, 1640–1560’, Studies Presented to the International Commission for the History of Representative and Parliamentary Institutions, IX, Louvain 1952, p. 70.
54. ‘We, as a prince, are of all laws unbound and freed’: the ducal claim was, of course, a direct rendition of the famous Roman maxim. For an account of Emanuele Filiberto’s reforms in Piedmont, see Vittorio de Caprariis, ‘L’Italia nell’Età della Controriforma’, in Nino Valeri (ed.), Storia d’Italia, II, Turin 1965, pp. 526–30.
55. The perequazione is discussed in S. J. Woolf, Studi sulla Nobiltà Piemontese nell’Epoca dell’Assolutismo, Turin 1963, pp. 69–75. The significance of this move for the general history of Absolutism is clear. In a mediaeval polity, where there was no central tax system, a ruler’s economic interest was to multiply the number of fiefs – which owed military service and feudal incidents – and reduce the number of allods, with their unconditional tenures and hence absence of obligations to any feudal superior. With the advent of a centralized fiscal system, the situation was reversed: fiefs fell outside the tax assessments, because they owed a military service that was now merely token, while allodial estates could be put under levy like urban or peasant properties. In Prussia at virtually the same time Frederick William I introduced in 1717 a similar reform to ‘commute’ knight service for a tax, by converting feudal into allodial property, thus in effect ending the fiscal immunity of the nobility. The measure aroused a storm of junker indignation.
56. G. Quazza, Le Riforme in Piemonte nella Prima Metà del Settecento, Modena 1957, pp. 103–6. Quazza thinks it probable that only Prussia equalled or surpassed Piedmont in military expenditures in this century.