06 -- Sweden

7
Sweden
The sudden ascent of a Swedish Absolutism in the first years of the 16th century, passing virtually without transition from an ‘early mediaeval’ to an ‘early modern’ type of feudal State, had no real equivalent in Western Europe. The emergence of the new State was precipitated from outside. In 1520 the new Danish king, Christian II, marched with an army into Sweden to enforce his authority there, defeating and executing the oligarchic Sture faction which had de facto ruled the country as a local Regency in the last years of the Union of Kalmar. The prospect of a strong foreign monarchy imposing itself on Sweden rallied the local aristocracy and sections of the independent peasantry behind a usurper noble, Gustavus Vasa, who rose against Danish dominion and established his own rule over the country three years later, with the aid of Lübeck – Hanseatic enemy and rival of Denmark. Gustavus, once installed in power, promptly and ruthlessly proceeded to lay the bases of a stable monarchical State in Sweden.
His first, and decisive, move was to set in train the expropriation of the Church, under the timely banner of the Reformation. Initiated in 1527, the process was effectively completed in 1544, when Sweden officially became a Lutheran country. The Vasa Reformation was undoubtedly the most successful economic operation of its kind accomplished by any dynasty in Europe. For, by contrast with the dissipated results of the Tudor seizure of the monasteries, or the German princes’ secularization of church lands, virtually the entire windfall of ecclesiastical estates accrued en bloc to the Swedish monarchy. By his confiscations, Gustavus quintupled the royal farms, besides annexing’ two-thirds of the tithes previously levied by the bishops on the population, and seizing massive hoards of plate from churches and monasteries.1 Exploiting silver mines, promoting bar-iron exports, and minutely supervising the revenues and receipts in his realm, Gustavus accumulated a vast surplus by the time of his death, without any commensurate increase in taxes. He simultaneously expanded the royal administrative apparatus for the management of the country by trebling the number of bailiffs, and experimenting with a central bureaucracy designed for him by German advisers. Regional autonomies in the turbulent Dalarna mining districts were suppressed and Stockholm was permanently garrisoned. The nobility, whose economic rivalry with the clergy had been used to associate it with the expropriation of church lands, was decreasingly invested with the straightforward knight’s fief, the old län p tjänst, and was more and more granted the new förläning, a type of semi-ministerial benefice that was much more limited in scope, amounting to an allocation of specific royal revenues for specific administrative assignments. This measure of centralization did not antagonize the aristocracy, which evinced a basic solidarity with the regime throughout Gustavus’s rule, enhanced by his defeat of peasant rebellions in Dalarna (1527) and Smland (1543–4), and military humbling of Lübeck. The traditional magnate rd was preserved for advice in matters of political importance, but excluded from day-to-day administration. The critical innovation of the Vasa political machinery was rather the constant use in the early part of Gustavus’s reign of the Estates Assembly, the Riksdag, which was repeatedly summoned to legitimate the acts of the new dynasty by giving the stamp of popular approval to royal policies. Gustavus’s most important achievement in this respect was to secure in 1544 the acceptance by the Estates at Vásterás of the principle that the monarchy should no longer be elective, but henceforward hereditary in the house of Vasa.2
Gustavus I’s sons, Erik XIV and John, thus inherited a vigorous, if still somewhat primitive State that had maintained cordial relations with the aristocratic class by imposing few burdens and injuring no privileges. Erik XIV, who succeeded in 1560, reformed and expanded the Army, intensifying the military service obligations of the nobility. He also created a new title-system, conferring on magnates the ranks of count and baron, and investing them with classical, hereditary fiefs. Externally, his reign inaugurated Swedish expansionism in the Northern Baltic. With the imminent collapse of the Order of Livonian Knights before Russian attack, and the intervention of Poland to secure their inheritance, Sweden occupied Reval on the other side of the Gulf of Finland. A confused and intricate struggle ensued among the Baltic powers for control of Livonia. In 1568, Erik XIV – prey to violent suspicions of leading magnates – was deposed as unbalanced. His brother John III, who succeeded, prosecuted the Livonian Wars with greater success by switching to alliance with Poland against Russia. In the late 1570’s, Polish forces swept Ivan IV’s armies back to Pskov, while Swedish troops conquered Estonia: the foundation of Sweden’s overseas empire was laid. At home, meanwhile, there was an accelerated drift towards the jorldning benefices, which were increasingly confided by the monarchy to parvenu functionaries and bailiffs, until by the 1590’s only one-third were in the hands of the nobility.3 Friction between the monarchy and aristocracy was thus visibly developing by the end of the century, despite Vasa success in the Livonian Wars. The accession of John Ill’s Catholic son Sigismund, in 1592, soon precipitated a period of acute religious and political conflicts which threatened the whole stability of the royal State. Sigismund, a devout adherent of the Counter-Reformation, had been elected king of Poland five years earlier, partly because of Vasa dynastic ties by marriage with the now defunct Jagellonian line. Obliged by the Swedish nobility, as a condition of acceptance, to respect Lutheranism in Sweden and to refrain from any administrative unification of his two kingdoms, he resided as an absentee monarch in Poland for ten years. In Sweden itself, his uncle Charles, Duke of Södermanland, and the magnate rd governed the country: Sigismund was effectively kept out of his northern realm by an entente between the Duke and the nobility. The increasingly arbitrary personal power concentrated by Charles eventually antagonized the higher aristocracy, who rallied to Sigismund when he returned in 1604 to reclaim his patrimony from the usurpation of his uncle. The armed confrontation which followed ended in ducal victory, much assisted by anti-papal propaganda against Sigismund, who was presented as menacing Sweden with re-catholicization.
The seizure of power by the Duke, who now became Charles IX, was sealed by a judicial massacre of the constitutionalist magnates of the rd who had sided with the losing contender in the dynastic conflict. Charles IX’s repression and neutralization of the rd was characteristically accompanied by a flurry of convocations of the Riksdag, which once again proved a docile and manipulable instrument of Swedish Absolutism. The nobility was kept at arm’s length from the central administration, and its military obligations were augmented. To mollify aristocratic dislike and contempt for his usurpation, the king distributed lands confiscated from oppositional magnates who had fled into emigation with Sigismund, and accorded a larger share of forldningar to the nobility.4 But on his death in 1611, the degree of tension and suspicion between the dynasty and aristocracy that had built up over the years was sharply revealed. For the nobility immediately seized the opportunity of a royal minority to impose a Charter in 1612 which formally condemned the illegalities of the past reign; restored the power of the rd over taxation and affairs of State; guaranteed noble primacy in appointments to the bureaucracy; and gave security of tenure and fixed salaries to state functionaries. The reign of Gustavus Adolphus was thus ushered in by a constitutional compact carefully designed to prevent any repetition of the tyrannies of his father. In fact, Gustavus Adolphus showed no inclination to revert to a crude royal autocracy. His rule, on the contrary, witnessed reconciliation and integration of the monarchy and nobility: the State apparatus ceased to be a rudimentary dynastic patrimony, as the aristocracy collectively enlisted in the modern and powerful administration and army now constructed in Sweden. Gustavus Adolphus’s grandee Chancellor Oxenstierna reorganized the whole executive system into five central colleges, staffed by noble bureaucrats. The rd became a regular Privy Council for deliberation of public policies. The legislative procedures and composition of the Riksdag were codified in 1617; an Ordinance legally divided the aristocracy into three grades and accorded it a special Chamber or Riddarhus in 1626, which henceforward became the dominant focus of the Estate assemblies. The country was divided into 24 provincial units (formally designated Ian), over each of which a landhovding or lord-lieutenant picked from the nobility was installed.5 A modernized educational system was promoted, while official ideology exalted the ethnic descent of the Swedish ruling class, whose ‘Gothic’ ancestors had once dominated Europe. Meanwhile, expenditure on the fleet increased six-fold during Gustavus Adolphus’s reign, while native troop-strengths quadrupled.6 This sweeping rationalization and re-invigoration of Swedish Absolutism at home provided the platform for Gustavus Adolphus’s military expansion abroad.
Extricating himself from the unsuccessful war with Denmark which Charles IX had bequeathed to him, by signing a costly peace at the start of his reign, the king concentrated his initial objectives in the Northern Baltic theatre, where Russia was still convulsed by the Time of Troubles and his brother Charles Philip was nearly installed as Tsar with boyar and Cossack backing. Territorial gains were soon clinched at Russian expense. By the Treaty of Stolbova in 1617, Sweden acquired Ingria and Karelia, giving it total command of the Gulf of Finland. Four years later, Gustavus Adolphus seized Riga from Poland. Then in 1625–6, Swedish armies rolled up Polish forces throughout Livonia, conquering the whole region. The next operation was an amphibious attack on Poland itself, where Sigismund still ruled. The strategic approaches to East Prussia were seized, with the annexation of Memel, Pillau and Elbing, and heavy tolls henceforward levied on the South Baltic corn trade. The conclusion of the Polish campaign in 1629 was promptly followed by the Swedish landing in Pomerania in 1630, inaugurating Gustavus Adolphus’s momentous intervention in the struggle for Germany during the Thirty Years’ War. By now, the total strength of the Swedish military apparatus comprised some 72,000 troops, of whom just over half were native soldiers: the war plans for 1630 envisaged the deployment of 46,000 men for the expedition to Germany, but in practice this target was not fulfilled.7 Nevertheless, in two brief years, Gustavus Adolphus led his armies victoriously in a great arc from Brandenburg through the Rhineland and into Bavaria, shattering the Habsburg position in the Empire. At the death of the king in 1632, on the triumphal field of Lützen, Sweden was the arbiter of Germany and the dominant power throughout Northern Europe.
What had rendered possible this meteoric ascent of Swedish Absolutism? To understand its nature and dynamic, it is necessary to look back at the distinctive traits of mediaeval Scandinavia outlined earlier. The central peculiarity of the Swedish social formation on the eve of the Vasa epoch was the markedly incomplete feudalization of the relations of production in the rural economy. A small-holder peasantry of a pre-feudal type still occupied half the cultivated land in the early 16th century. This did not mean, however, that Sweden ‘never knew feudalism’, as is often asserted.8 For the other half of Swedish agriculture was in the royal-clerical-noble complex, where conventional surplus-extraction of a feudal character from a dependent peasantry obtained: although the tenants in this sector were never juridically reduced to serfdom, extra-economic coercion pressed dues and services out of them in the fashion familiar all over Western Europe at this time. The predominant sector in the Swedish economy throughout the period was thus doubtless always feudal agriculture proper, since while there was an approximate equality of cultivated surface between the sectors, it may safely be assumed that productivity and output was generally higher on the larger noble and royal estates – the normal rule in Western Europe. Nevertheless, the extreme backwardness of the whole economy was at first glance its most striking characteristic in any comparative perspective. Less than half the soil was suitable for arable cultivation. Barley was overwhelmingly the main grain crop. Demesne consolidation was very limited – as late as the mid 17th century, only some 8 per cent of farms were manorial units.9 Moreover, the unique extent of petty production in the villages meant that the index of commercialization in agriculture was probably the lowest anywhere in the continent. A natural economy prevailed over vast areas of the country, to such an extent that as late as the 1570’s, a mere 6 per cent of royal revenues – taxes and rents – were paid in cash, while most state officials were equally remunerated in kind.10 In these conditions, where the temperature of monetary exchange was still sub-arctic, there was no possibility of a blossoming urban economy. Swedish towns were few and feeble, most of them German-founded and settled; foreign trade was virtually a monopoly of Hanseatic merchants. Prima facie, this configuration appears notably unpropitious for the sudden and successful emergence of a modern Absolutism. What is the explanation for the historical success of the Vasa State?
The answer to this question takes us to the centre of the specific character of Swedish Absolutism. The centralization of royal power in the 16th and 17th centuries was not a response to the crisis of serfdom and the disintegration of a manorial system by commodity exchange and social differentiation in the villages. Nor did it obliquely reflect the growth of local mercantile capital and an urban economy. Its initial impulse was transmitted from without; it was the threat of a rigorous Danish overlordship that mobilized the Swedish nobility behind Gustavus I, and it was Lübeck capital that financed his war effort against Christian II. But the conjuncture of the 1520’s did not form the fundamental matrix of Swedish Absolutism thereafter: this must be sought in the triangular relationship of class forces within the country. The basic, and determinant, social pattern behind it can for our purposes be summarized into a brief formula. The typical Western constellation in the early modern epoch was an aristocratic Absolutism raised above the social foundations of a non-servile peasantry and ascendant towns; the typical Eastern constellation was an aristocratic Absolutism erected over the foundations of a servile peasantry and subjugated towns. Swedish Absolutism, by contrast, was built on a base that was unique, because – for historical reasons outlined earlier – it combined free peasants and nugatory towns: in other words, a set of two ‘contradictory’ variables running across the master-division of the continent. In the overwhelmingly rural societies of the time, the first term of the peculiar Swedish constellation, a personally free peasantry, was ‘dominant’, and ensured the fundamental convergence of Swedish history, from its very different point of departure, with that of Western and not Eastern Europe. But its second term – the insignificance of the towns, itself the corollary of a large subsistence peasant sector never pumped by orthodox feudal mechanisms of surplus extraction – sufficed to give the nascent State structure of the Swedish monarchy its distinctive cast. For the nobility, while in one sense much less absolutely paramount in the countryside than its counterparts elsewhere in Western Europe, was also much less objectively constricted by the presence of an urban bourgeoisie. There was little chance of any wholesale reversal of the position of the peasantry, for the balance of social forces in the rural economy was too heavily weighted against the possibility of a violent enserfment. The deep roots and broad expanse of independent peasant property made this unfeasible, particularly since the very extent of this sector conversely reduced the numbers of the nobility outside it to an exceptionally low level. It must always be remembered that the Swedish aristocracy throughout the first century of Vasa rule was a very small class, by any European standards. Thus in 1611, it numbered some 400–500 families, out of a population of 1,300,000. However, at least a half to two-thirds of these were modest bucolic backwoodsmen, or knapar, with incomes little different from those of prosperous peasants. When Gustavus Adolphus established a Riddarhusordning to fix the limits of the whole estate legally, only 126 families passed the tests for admittance to it, in 1626.11 Of these, some 25 to 30 families constituted the inner circle of magnates who traditionally provided the counsellors of the rd. The ‘critical mass’ of the Swedish aristocracy in this epoch was thus always structurally inadequate to any frontal assault on the peasantry. At the same time, there was no burgher challenge whatever to its monopoly of political power. The Swedish social order was thus an unusually stable one, so long as no exogenous pressures were brought to bear on it.
It has been seen that it was precisely such pressures which precipitated the initial advent of Vasa rule. At this point, a further peculiarity of the Swedish situation became important. There had never been an articulated feudal hierarchy within the aristocracy during the Middle Ages, with full-scale parcellization of sovereignty, or chains of sub-infeudation. The fief system itself was late and imperfect. Thus no territorial potentates or feudal separatism of the continental type ever developed. Just because the vassal system was recent and relatively shallow, it never produced entrenched regional divisions among the small Swedish nobility. The first real emergence of fissiparous provincial power was actually a subsequent creation of the unitary monarchy itself, not a prior obstruction to it: the ducal appanages of Finland, Östergötland and Södermanland left by Gustavus Vasa in his testament to his younger sons, which disappeared in the next century.12 The result was that while the internal urgency of a centralized Absolutism was not great in Sweden, since depression of the peasantry was not practicable and control of the towns was not arduous, the obstacles to it within the landed ruling class were not very great either. A small and compact nobility could adapt relatively easily to a centralized monarchy. The low-pressure character of the basic class situation which underlay Swedish Absolutism, and determined its form and evolution, was visible in the odd role of the Estates system in it. For, on the one hand, the Riksdag was politically unique in its inclusion of a separate peasant estate within its four-curia system: there was no parallel to this in any other major country in Europe. On the other hand, the Riksdag in general, and the peasant delegates to it above all, formed a curiously passive body throughout this epoch, devoid of legislative initiative and virtually unswerving in complaisance to royal requests. Thus Vasa rule, indeed, had such frequent recourse to the Riksdag that it had been described without paradox as the epitome of ‘parliamentary absolutism’; for virtually every important increment of royal power from Gustavus I’s seizure of Church lands in 1527 to Charles XI’s proclamation of divine right in 1680 was solemnized by a loyal assembly. Aristocratic resistance to the monarchy was thus nearly always focussed in the rd – lineal descendant of a mediaeval curia regis – and not in the Riksdag, where the reigning sovereign could usually manipulate the non-noble orders against it, if a conflict should arise between the two.13 The Riksdag, on the surface an audacious institution for its time, was in fact a remarkably innocuous one. The monarchy never had any difficulty in using it for its political purposes in this period. Another, complementary reflection of the same basic social situation underlying the docility of the Estates was to be found in the Army. For precisely because of the existence of an independent peasantry, the Swedish State could afford a conscript army – alone in Renaissance Europe. Gustavus Vasa’s decree creating the utskrivning system of rural conscription in 1544 never ran the risk of arming a jacquerie, because the soldiers thus recruited had never been serfs: their legal and material condition was compatible with loyalty in the field.
The question remains, how Swedish Absolutism acquired not merely the political-ideological accoutrements, but the economic and military resources necessary for its European showing, with a domestic population of no more than 900,000 in the early 17th century. Here the general law that a viable Absolutism presupposed a substantive level of monetarization could not be evaded. A natural rural economy appeared to preclude this. In Sweden, however, there was one crucial enclave of commodity production, whose disproportionate profits compensated for the subnormal commercialization of agriculture, and provided the fortunes of the Vasa state in its phase of outward expansion. This was the mineral wealth of the iron and copper deposits of the Bergslagen. Mining everywhere occupies a special position in the transitional economies of early modern Europe: not only did it represent for a long time the largest concentration of workers in a single form of enterprise, but it was always the direct fulcrum of the monetary economy by its supply of precious metals, yet without itself necessarily involving any advanced level of manufacturing process or market demand. Moreover, the tradition of regalian rights over the subsoil in feudal Europe meant that it was often in one way or another an appurtenance of princes. Swedish copper and iron ore can thus be compared with Spanish silver and gold in their impact on the local Absolutism. Both allowed the combination of a powerful and aggressive State with a social formation without either great agrarian wealth or mercantile dynamism: Sweden was, of course, far more bereft of these than Spain. The zenith of the copper boom in Sweden was actually linked directly to the collapse of silver currency in Castile. For it was the issue of the new copper vellón by Lerma in the devaluation of 1599 that created a soaring international demand for the output of the Kopparberg at Falun. Gustavus Adolphus levied heavy regalian tolls on the copper mines, organized a royal export company to corner supply and fix price levels, and raised large Dutch credits for his wars against his mineral assets. Although the vellón was suspended in 1626, Sweden continued to possess virtually a copper monopoly throughout Europe. Meanwhile, the iron industry steadily progressed, increasing its production five-fold by the end of the 17th century, when it amounted to half of all exports.14 Moreover, both copper and iron were not merely direct sources of cash revenue for the Absolutist State: they were also the indispensable materials for its arms industry. Bronze-cast cannon were the decisive artillery arm in this epoch, while all other types of weaponry demanded high-grade iron. With the arrival of the legendary Walloon entrepreneur Louis De Geer in the 1620’s, Sweden soon possessed one of the largest armaments complexes in Europe. The mines thus felicitously supplied Swedish Absolutism with both the financial and military substructure necessary for its surge across the Baltic. Prussian tolls, German booty and French subsidies completed its war budget for the duration of the Thirty Years’ War, and rendered possible the hiring of vast numbers of mercenaries who eventually came to swamp the Swedish expeditionary troops themselves.15
The Empire thus won proved, unlike the Spanish possessions in Europe, reasonably profitable. The Baltic provinces, in particular, with their corn shipments to Sweden, always yielded substantial tax revenues, with a large net surplus after local expenditures had been deducted. Their share of total royal receipts was well over a third in the budget of 1699.16 Moreover, the Swedish nobility gained particularly extensive estates in conquered Livonia, where agriculture approximated much more closely to a manorial pattern than in the homeland. The overseas branches of the aristocracy in their turn played an important role in staffing the expensive military machine of Swedish imperial expansion: in the early 18th century, one out of every three of Charles XII’s officers in his Polish and Russian campaigns was from the Baltic provinces. Swedish Absolutism, indeed, always functioned most smoothly during phases of aggressive expansion outwards: it was during the reigns of royal generalissimos – Gustavus Adolphus, Charles X and the early years of Charles XII – that harmony between monarchy and nobility was customarily greatest. But the external success of Swedish Absolutism never wholly cancelled its internal limitations. It suffered from a fundamental under-determination, because of the comparatively dormant class configuration within Sweden itself. Thus it always remained a ‘facultative’ form of rule for the noble class itself. In socially atonic conditions, Absolutism tended to lack the pressure of vital class necessity. Hence the curious pendular trajectory of Swedish Absolutism, unlike that of any other in Europe. Instead of a progression through initial grave contradictions, to an ultimate stabilization and tranquil integration of the nobility, which as we have seen was the normal evolution elsewhere, in Sweden the absolute monarchy suffered recurrent reverses whenever there was a royal minority, and yet later regained lost ground no less recurrently: the aristocratic charters of 1611, 1632 and 1720, limiting royal power, were succeeded by the recrudescence of absolutist power in the 1620’s, 1680’s and 1772–89.17 What is striking about these oscillations is the relative ease with which the aristocracy adjusted to either form of state –‘royal’ or ‘representative’. Throughout the entire three centuries of its existence, Swedish Absolutism suffered frequent institutional relapses, but never a real political upheaval of the nobility against it, comparable to those in Spain, France and England. Just because it was domestically to a certain extent a facultative State for the ruling class, the aristocracy could convert backwards and forwards to it without undue emotion or discomfort. The history of Sweden from the death of Gustavus Adolphus in 1632 to the putsch of Gustavus III in 1789 is largely that of its successive adjustments.
Naturally, divisions and conflicts within the nobility itself were one of the central regulators of these serial changes. Thus the Form of Government imposed by Oxenstierna after Lützen codified magnate rule in the rd (now packed with his own relatives) during the regency from 1632–44. The Chancellor was soon confronted with a strategic downturn in Germany: the Imperial victory at Nordlingen in 1634 was followed by the defection of most of the Protestant princes in 1635, while the lucrative Prussian tolls – critical for the Swedish war efforts – now lapsed by treaty. Swedish tax revenues paid only for the maintenance of the Baltic navy – trebled to some 90 ships by Gustavus Adolphus – and home defense. French subsidies henceforward became indispensable for the pursuit of the struggle by Stockholm: in 1641, they amounted to a third of the domestic income of the State.18 The campaigns in Germany during the last half of the Thirty Years’ War, fought with much smaller armies than the huge hosts assembled at Breitenfeld or Lützen, were financed by foreign subventions or loans and ruthless local extortions by the commanders abroad. In 1643, Oxenstierna unleashed Torstensson – the best Swedish general – against Denmark, in a side-campaign. The yield of this stroke was satisfactory: provincial gains along the Norwegian frontier, and island bases in the Baltic which ended Danish control of both sides of the Sound. In the wider conflict, Swedish troops had reached Prague when peace was restored in 1648. The Treaty of Westphalia consecrated the international stature of Sweden as co-victor with France of the long contest in Germany. The Vasa State acquired Western Pomerania and Bremen on the German mainland itself, and control of the mouths of the Elbe, Oder and Weser – the three great rivers of Northern Germany.
Meanwhile, however, the accession of Christina in 1644 had formally led to the political reassertion of royal power: but it was used by the light-headed queen to shower titles and lands on the upper stratum of the aristocracy and the swarm of military-bureaucratic adventurers drawn to Swedish service in the Thirty Years’ War. Christina sex-tupled the number of counts and barons in the top rank of the Riddarhus, and doubled the size of the two lower ranks. For the first time the Swedish nobility acquired an appreciable numerical strength, mainly drawn from abroad: more than half the aristocracy was to be of foreign descent by 1700.19 Moreover, encouraged by Oxenstierna who advocated commutation of traditional state revenues in kind into reliable cash flows, the monarchy alienated royal lands and taxes on an enormous scale to its elite of functionaries and retainers: the total area of noble land in Sweden doubled between 1611 and 1652, while state incomes cascaded proportionately downwards under Christina.20 The alienations to private landowners of fiscal receipts from free peasants threatened to reduce the latter to full dependence on them, and provoked vigorous reactions from the peasantry. But it was the hostility of the lower nobility, which had not benefited from the gratuitous profligacy of the queen, that was to ensure that this upheaval in the property pattern of Sweden would be a brief one.
In 1654 Christina abdicated to embrace Catholicism, after prearranging the succession of her cousin. The new ruler, Charles X, immediately relaunched Swedish expansionism with a savage thrust into Poland in 1655. Cutting off Russian advances from the East, and scattering Polish armies, Swedish expeditionary forces took Poznan, Warsaw and Cracow in quick succession: East Prussia was officially declared a Swedish fief, and Lithuania joined to Sweden. Dutch harrassment by sea and Polish revival weakened the grip of this spectacular occupation: but it was a direct Danish attack on Sweden in the rear of the king that undid the conquest of Poland. Pulling the bulk of his corps rapidly back through Pomerania, Charles X marched to Copenhagen and knocked Denmark out of the war. Victory in the Sound brought annexation of Scania. Renewed hostilities to clinch Swedish control of the gateway to the Baltic were thwarted by Dutch intervention. The death of Charles X in 1660 terminated both the adventure in Poland and the conflict in Denmark. Another magnate regency followed during the minority of 1660–72, dominated by the Chancellor De La Gardie. Royal schemes for resumption of alienated revenues, briefly envisaged by Charles X before his headlong overseas campaigns, were shelved: a drifting government of the high nobility continued to sell off the property of the monarchy, while steering an unambitious foreign policy. It was in this decade, significantly, that manorial codes of gdrdsrdtt were enforced for the first time in Swedish history, giving landowners private jurisdiction over their own peasantry.21 The outbreak of a major European war, with Louis XIV’s attack on Holland, eventually forced this regime, as a French ally and client, into a lethargic diversionary conflict with Brandenburg in 1674. Military failure in Germany discredited the De La Gardie camarilla, and paved the way for the dramatic reascendancy of the monarchy under the new sovereign, who had achieved his majority during the wars.
In 1680, Charles XI used the Riksdag to abolish the traditional privileges of the rd, and to reappropriate the alienated lands and revenues of the dynasty, with the support of the lower gentry. The royal ‘reductions’ were on a very large scale: 80 per cent of all alienated estates were recovered for the monarchy without compensations, and the proportion of cultivated land owned by nobles in Sweden was halved.22 The creation of new tax-exempt properties was forbidden. Territorial counties and baronies were liquidated. The ‘reductions’ were implemented with special thoroughness in the overseas possessions. They did not affect manorial consolidation within the holdings of the aristocracy; their final upshot was to restore the status quo ante in the distribution of agrarian property which had prevailed at the beginning of the century.23 State revenues, refurbished by this programme at the expense of the magnate stratum, were further augmented by higher taxation on the. peasantry. The Riksdag submissively assented to the unprecedented increase in the personal power of Charles XI which accompanied the reduktion, abdicating virtually all rights to control or check his government. Charles XI used his position to reform the army by planting a soldier-peasantry on specially distributed lands in the so-called indelningsverket or allotment system, which relieved the treasury of cash payments for troops at home. The permanent military establishment was enlarged to a force of some 63,000 in the 1680’s, of which over a third were professional units stationed overseas. The fleet was assiduously built up, for both strategic and commercial reasons. The bureaucracy, to which the lower nobility now had equal access, was drilled and streamlined. Scania and Livonia were subjected to tightening centralization and Swedification.24 The royal sway appeared complete by the last decade of the reign: in 1693 the Riksdag ended by passing a fulsome resolution declaring the divine right of the king to absolute sovereignty over his realm, as the anointed delegate of his maker. Charles XI, like Frederick William I of Prussia a thrifty and cautious ruler abroad, brooked no opposition to his will at home.
The best testament to his work was the astonishing reign of his son Charles XII, who surpassed his father in an autocratic power that was ideologically trumpeted from the day of his accession in 1697. The last of the Vasa warrior-kings, he was able to spend eighteen years abroad, nine of them in Turkish captivity, without the civil administration of his country ever being seriously challenged or disrupted in his absence. It is doubtful if any other contemporary ruler could have been so confident of his patrimony. In effect, virtually the entire reign of Charles XII was occupied with his long odyssey in Eastern Europe, during the Great Northern War. For by 1700, the Swedish imperial system in the Baltic was approaching its day of reckoning. Despite the rigorous administrative overhaul it had recently undergone under Charles XI, its demographic and economic base was too small to sustain its spread, against the combined enmity of its neighbours and rivals. A domestic population of perhaps 1,500,000 was doubled by the overseas possessions to some 3,000,000: its manpower and financial reserves permitted a maximum mobilization of some 110,000 troops (including foreign mercenaries) under Charles XII, of whom less than half were available for his major offensive campaigns.25 Moreover, Vasa centralization had provoked a particularist backlash among the semi-Germanic nobility of the Baltic provinces, who had suffered especially from the royal reclamations of the preceding reign. The experience of Catalonia and Scotland was now to be re-edited in Livonia. By 1699, Denmark, Saxony, Poland and Russia were arrayed against Sweden: the signal for war was given by a secessionist revolt in Latvia, led by local nobles declaring for incorporation into Poland. Charles XII struck first at Denmark, which he rapidly defeated with Anglo-Dutch naval aid; then at Russia, where a small Swedish force annihilated Peter I’s army at Narva; then at Poland, where Augustus II was driven from the country after heavy fighting and a Swedish nominee prince installed; and finally at Saxony, which was mercilessly occupied and pillaged. After this circular military progress round the Baltic, the Swedish army was thrown deep into the Ukraine for a juncture with the Zaporozhe Cossacks and march on Moscow.26 Russian Absolutism under Peter I was now, however, more than a match for the columns of Charles XII: at Poltava and Perevolotchna in 1709, the Swedish Empire was destroyed at the furthest historical point of its military penetration to the east. A decade later, the Great Northern War ended with Sweden bankrupt and stripped of Ingria, Karelia, Livonia, Western Pomerania and Bremen.
The imperious autocracy of Charles XII disappeared with him. When the disasters of the Great Northern War debouched onto the king’s death, amid a disputed succession, the nobility deftly engineered a constitutional system which left the Estates politically supreme and the monarchy temporarily a cipher. The ‘Age of Liberty’ from 1720–72 established a regime of corrupt aristocratic parliamentarism, divided by factional conflicts between Hat and Cap parties, which were manipulated in turn by the nobiliary bureaucracy, and ballasted by English, French and Russian gratifications and subventions. The new order was no longer a magnate one: the mass of the medium and lower aristocracy, which dominated the civil service and army, had increasingly come into its own. The three-rank division within the noble Estate was abolished. The social and economic privileges of the aristocracy as a whole were jealously preserved: commoner access to noble lands or marriages was banned. The Riksdag – from whose key Secret Committee peasant representatives were excluded – became the formal centre of constitutional politics, while its real arena lay in the Riddarhus.27 Eventually, increasing social agitation against noble privileges among the lower clergy, smaller towns and peasantry threatened to break the charmed circle of manoeuvres within this system. The programme of the Younger Cap party in the 1760’s, although combined with an unpopular deflation of the economy, expressed the rising tide of plebeian discontent. Aristocratic alarm at the prospect of a challenge from below thus produced a final, abrupt abandonment of parliamentarism. The accession of Gustavus III proved the signal for the aristocracy to rally once again back to an Absolutist formula: a royal putsch was smoothly conducted with the help of the Guards and the connivance of the bureaucracy. The Riksdag duly rubber-stamped a new constitution, reconsecrating the authority of the monarchy, initially without a full reversion to the absolutism of Charles XI or XII. The new monarch, however, energetically proceeded towards an enlightened despotism of the 18th century type, renovating the administration, and reserving more and more arbitrary power to his person. When the nobility resisted this trend, Gustavus III forced an emergency Act of Union and Security through the Riksdag, which restored a thorough-going Absolutism in 1789. To gain his ends, the king had to promise the lower Estates access to the civil service and judiciary, the right to purchase noble lands, and other socially egalitarian demands. The last hours of Swedish Absolutism were thus lived in the anomalous atmosphere of a ‘career open to the talents’ and curbs on the privileges of the nobility. The political rationale of absolute monarchy thereby lost its basic moorings, a sure sign of its approaching end. In a final, bizarre permutation of roles, the ‘radical’ autocrat became the most fervent European champion of counter-revolutionary intervention against the French Revolution, while disgruntled nobles adopted the republican ideals of the Rights of Man. In 1792, Gustavus was assassinated by a dissident aristocratic officer. The historical ‘under-determination’ of Swedish Absolutism was never more visible than in this strange climax. A facultative State finished in apparently full contingency.

1. Michael Roberts, The Early Vasas, Cambridge 1968, pp. 178–9. The English-speaking reader is fortunate in having available the distinguished and ample oeuvre of this historian of early modern Sweden.
2. The flinty personality of Gustavus Vasa inevitably recalls that of the state-building succession of West European rulers just before him: Henry VII, Louis XI and Ferdinand II – just as his extravagant eldest son Erik XIV bears certain resemblances to the flamboyant instability of Henry VIII and Francis I. A sober study of such generational shifts and clusters might sometimes prove of wider interest than conventional biographies.
3. Roberts, The Early Vasas, p. 306.
4. Roberts, The Early Vasas, p. 440.
5. Michael Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, A History of Sweden 1611–1632, I, London 1953, pp. 265–78, 293–7, 319–24.
6. Pierre Jeannin, L’Europe du Nord-Ouest et du Nord aux XVIIe et XVIIIe Siècles, Paris 1969, p. 130.
7. Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, A History of Sweden 1611–1632, II, London 1958, pp. 414–15, 444. In effect, the king started his German campaigns with some 26,000 troops.
8. See, for example, E. Hecksher, An Economic History of Sweden, Cambridge USA, 1954, pp. 36–8; M. Roberts, ‘Introduction’ to Ingvar Andersson, A History of Sweden, London 1956, p. 5 (contradicted by the book introduced: compare pp. 43–4).
9. Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, II, p. 152.
10. Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, II, p. 44.
11. Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, Vol. II, p. 57. The figure for total population above includes Finland: Sweden itself had some 900,000 inhabitants in this period.
12. Gustavus Vasa’s death-bed division of his country by the creation of these dangerous appanages, after a life-time of royal centralization, captures a typically feudal trait of many of the pioneers of European Absolutism. It can be compared to the even more drastic testamentary instructions for the dismemberment of the Hohenzollern domains left by the Great Elector himself, supreme architect of the unitary Prussian State. A dynastic patrimony always remained potentially divisible for these rulers.
13. The whole tradition and role of the rd is examined in Roberts’s essay, ‘On Aristocratic Constitutionalism in Swedish History, 1520–1720’, Essays in Swedish History, pp. 14–55.
14. Stewart Oakley, The Story of Sweden, London 1966, p. 125.
15. Gustavus Adolphus started his campaigns in Germany with an army of which half was recruited in Sweden. By the time of Breitenfeld, this had sunk to a quarter. By the time of Lützen, it was less than a tenth (13,000 out of 140,000). Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, Vol. II, pp. 206–7. Domestic conscription thus in no way sufficed to exempt Swedish Absolutism from the general laws of European militarism in this epoch.
16. Jeannin, L’Europe du Nord-Ouest et du Nord, p. 330.
17. Roberts points out that aristocratic constitutionalism never won a victory over a king of full age: it was the relative frequency of minorities which gave it periodic chances of reassertion: Essays in Swedish History, p. 33.
18. Roberts, ‘Sweden and the Baltic 1611–1654’, The New Cambridge Modern History, IV, p. 401.
19. R. M. Hatton, Charles XII of Sweden, London 1968, p. 38.
20. Total receipts dropped 40 per cent in the decade from 1644 to 1653. For the whole episode, see Roberts’s essay, ‘Queen Christina and the General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century’, Essays in Swedish History, pp. 111–37.
21. They were abolished again in the 1670’s: Jeannin, L’Europe du Nord-Ouest et du Nord, p. 135.
22. For the reductions, see J. Rosen, ‘Scandinavia and the Baltic’, The New Cambridge Modern History of Europe, V, p. 534. In 1655, nobles had owned  of all farms in the country. By 1700, the proportions were 33 per cent noble, 36 per cent royal and 31 per cent tax-paying peasant. The reductions had increased the revenues of the monarchy by some 2,000,000 daler a year at the end of the reign; of this increment,  was derived from repossessions in the overseas provinces.
23. The dramatic peripeteia of the alienations and reversions of the Swedish royal patrimony in the mid 17th century, which in a brief space reshuffled the whole property pattern of the country, are generally interpreted as the sign of a deep social struggle for the land, in which the Swedish peasantry was only just rescued from a ‘Livonian serfdom’ by the reductions. However widespread, it is difficult to accept this view. For the origins of this interlude were too manifestly linked to the subjective whims of Christina. Her reckless donations were made in peace-time and corresponded to no objective need of the monarchy; nor were they the result of any irrecusable collective drive or demand of the nobility. Won without effort by the higher aristocracy, they were abandoned without resistance. There was never any class confrontation on the land of a gravity commensurate with the stakes formally involved. It may be assumed that it would have taken more than feckless royal largesse to break the liberties of the Swedish peasantry.
24. Rosen, ‘Scandinavia and the Baltic’, pp. 535–7.
25. The attack on Russia in 1709 was launched with about 44,000 men: Hatton, Charles XII of Sweden, p. 233.
26. The blunder involved in this venture is notorious. It may be remarked that the military flair of Swedish Absolutism was nearly always typically combined with political myopia. Its rulers consistently applied force with consummate skill to misconceived targets. Gustavus Adolphus careered vainly across Germany, when Swedish long-term interests indicated seizure of Denmark and mastery of the Sound. Charles XII lunged uselessly into the Ukraine, at British prompting, when a French alliance and attack on Austria would have altered the whole course of the War of the Spanish Succession, and saved Sweden from its complete isolation at the conclusion of the struggle in the East. The dynasty never overcame a certain provincialism in its strategic outlook.
27. See Roberts, Essays in Swedish History, pp. 272–8; the ban on commoner purchase of noble land was later confined to peasants only, while the marriage restrictions were also mitigated.