07 -- Absolutism in the East

1
Absolutism in the East
It is now necessary to revert to the Eastern half of Europe, or more accurately that part of it which was spared the Ottoman invasion that over-ran the Balkans in successive waves of advance, subjecting it to a local history separate from that of the rest of the continent. It has been seen how the great crisis which struck the European economies in the 14th and 15th centuries produced a violent manorial reaction east of the Elbe. The seigneurial repression unleashed against the peasants increased in intensity throughout the 16th century. The political result, in Prussia and Russia, was an Absolutism of the East, coeval with that of the West yet basically different in lineage. The Absolutist State in the West was the redeployed political apparatus of a feudal class which had accepted the commutation of dues. It was a compensation for the disappearance of serfdom, in the context of an increasingly urban economy which it did not completely control and to which it had to adapt. The Absolutist State in the East, by contrast, was the repressive machine of a feudal class that had just erased the traditional communal freedoms of the poor. It was a device for the consolidation of serfdom, in a landscape scoured of autonomous urban life or resistance. The manorial reaction in the East meant that a new world had to be implanted from above, by main force. The dose of violence pumped into social relations was correspondingly far greater. The Absolutist State in the East never lost the signs of this original experience.
Yet at the same time, the internal class struggle within the Eastern social formations and its outcome, the enserfment of the peasantry, do not in themselves provide an exhaustive explanation for the emergence of the distinctive type of Absolutism of the region. The distance between the two can be measured chronologically in Prussia, where the manorial reaction of the nobility had already rolled over much of the peasantry with the spread of the Gutsherrschaft in the 16th century, a hundred years before the establishment of an Absolutist State in the 17th century. In Poland, classical land of the ‘second serfdom’, no Absolutist State ever emerged, although this was a failure for which the noble class was eventually to pay with its national existence. Here, too, however, the 16th century witnessed decentralized feudal rule, dominated by a representative system totally under aristocratic control, and very weak princely authority. In Hungary, the definitive enserfment of the peasantry was accomplished after the Austro-Turkish War at the turn of the 17th century, while the Magyar nobility was successfully resisting the imposition of a Habsburg Absolutism.1 In Russia, the installation of serfdom and the erection of Absolutism were more closely coordinated, but even there the onset of the first preceded the consolidation of the second, and did not always develop pari passu with it thereafter. Since servile relations of production involve an immediate fusion of property and sovereignty, lordship and landlordship, there is nothing in itself surprising in a polycentric nobiliary State, such as initially existed in Ostelbian Germany, Poland or Hungary after the manorial reaction in the East. To explain the subsequent ascent of Absolutism it is necessary first of all to reinsert the whole process of the second serfdom into the international state system of late feudal Europe.
We have seen that the pull of the more advanced Western economy on the East has often been exaggerated in this epoch, as the sole or main force responsible for the manorial reaction there. In fact, while the corn trade undoubtedly intensified servile exploitation in Eastern Germany or Poland, it did not inaugurate it in either country, and played no role at all in the parallel development of Bohemia or Russia. In other words, if it is incorrect to ascribe central importance to the economic bonds of the export-import trade from East to West, this is because the feudal mode of production as such – by no means finally surpassed in Western Europe during the 16th and 17th centuries – could not create a unified international economic system; it was only the world market of industrial capitalism that accomplished this, radiating out from the advanced countries to mould and dominate the development of backward ones. The composite Western economies of the transitional epoch – typically combining a semi-monetarized and post-servile feudal agriculture2 with enclaves of mercantile and manufacturing capital – had no such compulsive pull. Foreign investment was minimal, except in the Colonial Empires and to some extent Scandinavia. Foreign trade still represented a small percentage of the national product of all countries except Holland or Venice. Any wholesale integration of Eastern Europe into a Western European economic circuit – often implied by historians’ use of such phrases as a ‘colonial economy’ or ‘plantation business concerns’ to refer to the Gutsherrschaft system beyond the Elbe – is thus inherently implausible.
This is not to say, however, that the impact of Western on Eastern Europe was not determinant for the state structures which emerged there. For transnational interaction within feudalism was typically always first at the political, not the economic level, precisely because it was a mode of production founded on extra-economic coercion: conquest, not commerce, was its primary form of expansion. The uneven development of feudalism within Europe thus found its most characteristic and direct expression, not in balances of trade, but in balances of arms, between the respective regions of the continent. In other words, the main mediation between East and West in these centuries was military. It was the international pressure of Western Absolutism, the political apparatus of a more powerful feudal aristocracy, ruling more advanced societies, which obliged the Eastern nobility to adopt an equivalently centralized state machine, to survive. For otherwise the superior military force of the reorganized and magnified Absolutist armies would inevitably take its toll in the normal medium of inter-feudal competition: war. The very modernization of troops and tactics brought about by the ‘military revolution’ in the West after 1560 rendered aggression into the vast spaces of the East more feasible than ever before, and the dangers of invasion correspondingly greater for the local aristocracies there. Thus, at a time when infrastructural relations of production were diverging, there was a paradoxical convergence of superstructures in the two zones (itself, of course, an index of an ultimate common mode of production). The concrete form which the military threat from Western Absolutism initially took was, fortunately for the Eastern nobility, historically circuitous and transient. It is nevertheless all the more striking how immediately catalytic its effects were for the whole political pattern in the East. To the South, the front between the two zones was occupied by the long Austro-Turkish duel, which for two hundred and fifty years focussed the Habsburgs on their Ottoman enemies and Hungarian vassals. In the Centre, Germany was a maze of small, weak states divided and neutralized by religious conflicts. It was thus from the relatively primitive North that the attack came. Sweden – most recent and surprising of all the Western Absolutisms, a new country with a very limited population and rudimentary economy – proved to be the Hammer of the East. Its impact on Prussia, Poland and Russia in the ninety years from 1630 to 1720 bears comparison with that of Spain in Western Europe in an earlier age, although it has never received the same study. Yet it was one of the greatest cycles of military expansion in the history of European Absolutism. At its height, Swedish cavalry rode victoriously into the five capitals of Moscow, Warsaw, Berlin, Dresden and Prague – operating across a huge arc of territory in Eastern Europe that exceeded even the campaigns of the Spanish tercios in Western Europe. The Austrian, Prussian, Polish and Russian state-systems all experienced its formative shock.
Sweden’s first overseas conquest was the seizure of Estonia, in the long Livonian Wars with Russia in the last decades of the 16th century. It was the Thirty Years’ War, however, which produced the first fully formalized international state system in Europe, that appropriately marked the decisive onset of the Swedish irruption into the East. The spectacular march of Gustavus Adolphus’s armies into Germany, rolling back Habsburg power to the astonishment of Europe, proved the turning-point of the war; while the later successes of Baner and Torstensson scotched any long-term recovery of the Imperial cause. From 1641 onwards, Swedish troops permanently occupied large parts of Moravia,3 and when the war ended in 1648, were camped on the left bank of the Vltava in Prague. The intervention of Sweden had definitively broken the prospect of a Habsburg imperial state in Germany: the whole course and character of Austrian Absolutism were henceforward to be determined by this defeat, which deprived it of any chance of a consolidated territorial centre in the traditional lands of the Reich, and – to its cost – shifted its whole centre of gravity eastwards. At the same time, the impact of Swedish power on the evolution ot Prussia, less visible internationally, was domestically even deeper. Brandenburg was occupied by Swedish armies from 1631 onwards, and although technically an ally in the Protestant cause, was immediately subjected to ruthless military requisitioning and fiscal exactions, such as it had never known before: the traditional privileges of the junker Estates were dismissed out of hand by Swedish commandants.4 The trauma of this experience was compounded by the Swedish acquisition of Western Pomerania with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which ensured Sweden a large and permanent beachhead on the southern shores of the Baltic. Swedish garrisons now controlled the Oder, posing a direct threat to the hitherto demilitarized and decentralized ruling class of Brandenburg, a country with virtually no army at all. The construction of Prussian Absolutism by the Great Elector from the 1650’s onwards was in large measure a direct response to the impending Swedish menace: the standing army which was to be the cornerstone of Hohenzollern autocracy, and its tax system, was accepted by the junkers in 1653 to deal with an imminent war situation in the Baltic theatre and resist external dangers. In fact, the Swedo-Polish War of 1655–60 proved to be the turning-point in the political evolution of Berlin, which itself avoided the brunt of Swedish aggression by participating as an apprehensive junior partner on the side of Stockholm. The next great step in the construction of Prussian Absolutism was once again taken in response to military conflict with Sweden. It was during the 1670’s, in the throes of the Swedish campaigns against Brandenburg that formed a Northern theatre of the war unleashed by France in the West, that the notorious Generalkriegskommissariat came to occupy the functions of the earlier privy council and to mould henceforward the whole structure of the Hohenzollern State machine. Prussian Absolutism, and its ultimate shape, came into being during the epoch and under the pressure of Swedish expansionism.
Meanwhile, it was in these same decades after Westphalia that the heaviest Nordic blow of all was unleashed in the East. The Swedish invasion of Poland in 1655 quickly shattered the loose aristocratic confederation of the szlachta. Warsaw and Cracow fell, and the whole Vistula valley was torn up by the march and counter-march of Charles X’s troops. The main strategic result of the war was to deprive Poland of any suzerainty over Ducal Prussia. But the social results of the devastating Swedish attack were far more serious: Polish economic and demographic patterns were so badly damaged that the Swedish invasion came to be known as the ‘Deluge’ which for ever after separated the previous prosperity of the Rzeczpospolita from the irretrievable crisis and decline into which it sank thereafter. The last brief revival of Polish arms in the 1680’s, when Sobieski led the relief of Vienna against the Turks, was soon followed by the second Swedish ravage of the Commonwealth, during the Great Northern War of 1701–21, in which the main theatre of destruction was once again Poland. When the last Scandinavian troops withdrew from Warsaw, Poland had ceased to be a major European power. The Polish nobility, for reasons which will be discussed later, did not succeed in generating an Absolutism during these ordeals. It thereby demonstrated in practice what the consequences of not doing so were, for a feudal class in the East; unable to recover from the lethaL blows delivered by Sweden, Poland ultimately ceased to exist as an independent state.
Russia, as always, presents a somewhat different case, within a common historical field. There, the impulse within the aristocracy towards a military monarchy was evident much earlier than anywhere else in Eastern Europe. In part, this was due to the pre-history of the Kievan State, and the Byzantine imperial tradition it transmitted across the chaotic Russian Middle Ages, through the ideology of the ‘Third Rome’: Ivan III had married the niece of the last Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople and arrogated the title of ‘Tsar’ or Emperor in 1480. The ideology of the translatio imperii was doubtless, however, less important than the constant material pressure on Russia of the Tartar and Turcoman pastoralists of Central Asia. The political suzerainty of the Golden Horde lasted until the late 15th century. The successor Khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan launched constant slaving incursions from the East until their defeat and absorption in the mid 16th century. For another hundred years, the Crimean Tartars – now under Ottoman overlordship – raided Russian territory from the South; their looting and enslaving expeditions kept most of the Ukraine a depopulated wilderness.5 Tartar horsemen lacked the capacity to conquer or occupy permanently, in the early modern epoch. But Russia, ‘sentinel of Europe’, had to bear the brunt of their attacks, and the result was an earlier and greater impetus towards a centralized State in the Duchy of Muscovy than in the more sheltered Electorate of Brandenburg or the Polish Commonwealth. But from the 16th century onwards, the military threat in the West was always much greater than that in the East, field artillery and modern infantry now easily outclassing mounted archery as weapons of warfare. Thus in Russia too, the really decisive phases of the transition towards Absolutism occurred during successive phases of Swedish expansion. The pivotal reign of Ivan IV in the late 16th century was dominated by the long Livonian Wars, of which Sweden was the strategic victor, annexing Estonia by the Treaty of Yam Zapolsky in 1582: a springboard for mastery of the Northern Baltic littoral. The Time of Troubles in the early 17th century, which ended with the critical accession of the Romanov dynasty, saw Swedish power unfurled into the depths of Russia. Amidst mounting chaos, a corps commanded by De La Gardie fought its way to Moscow to shore up the usurper Shuisky; three years later a Swedish candidate – Gustavus Adolphus’s brother – came within an ace of election to the Russian monarchy itself, only just being blocked by that of Mikhail Romanov in 1613. The new regime was promptly obliged to cede Karelia and Ingria to Sweden, which within another decade had seized the whole of Livonia from Poland, giving it virtually complete control of the Baltic. Swedish influence was also extensive within the Russian political system itself, in the early years of Romanov rule.6 Finally, of course, the massive statal edifice of Peter I in the early 18th century was erected during and against the supreme Swedish military offensive into Russia, led by Charles XII, which had started by shattering Russian armies at Narva and was eventually to thrust deep into the Ukraine. Tsarist power within Russia was thus tested and forged in the international struggle for ascendancy with the Swedish Empire in the Baltic. The Austrian State had been turned back from Germany by Swedish expansion; the Polish State disjointed altogether; the Prussian and Russian States, by contrast, withstood and repelled it, acquiring their developed form in the course of the contest. Eastern Absolutism was thus centrally determined by the constraints of the international political system into which the nobilities of the whole region were objectively integrated.7 It was the price of their survival in a civilization of unremitting territorial warfare; the uneven development of feudalism obliged them to match the State structures of the West before they had reached any comparable stage of economic transition towards capitalism.
Yet this Absolutism was, inevitably, also overdetermined by the course of class struggle within the Eastern social formations. It is now necessary to consider the endogenous pressures which contributed to its emergence. An initial concordance is striking. The decisive juridical and economic consolidation of serfdom in Prussia, Russia and Bohemia occurred during precisely the same decades in which the political foundations of the Absolutist State were firmly laid. This double development – institutionalization of serfdom and inauguration of Absolutism – was in all three cases closely and clearly linked in the history of the social formation concerned. In Brandenburg, the Great Elector and the Estates sealed the famous bargain of 1653, consigned in a formal Charter, whereby the nobility voted taxes for a permanent army, and the prince decreed ordinances binding the rural labour force irretrievably to the land. The taxes were to be levied on the towns and peasants, not on the junkers themselves, while the army was to be the core of the whole Prussian State. It was a pact which both increased the political power of the dynasty over the nobility, and that of the nobility over the peasantry. East German serfdom was now normalized and standardized everywhere in the Hohenzollern lands beyond the Elbe; while the Estates system was relentlessly suppressed by the monarchy, in province after province. By 1683, the Landtage of Brandenburg and East Prussia had lost all power, permanently.8 Meanwhile, in Russia a very similar conjuncture had occurred. In 1648, the Zemsky Sobor – Assembly of the Land – gathered in Moscow, to pass the historic Sobornoe Ulozhenie which for the first time codified and universalized serfdom for the rural population; instituted strict state control over the towns and their inhabitants; while at the same time confirming and clinching the formal liability of all noble lands for military service. The Sobornoe Ulozhenie was the first comprehensive legal code to be promulgated in Russia, and its advent was a momentous event: it provided, in effect, Tsarism with the regulative juridical framework for its solidification as a state system. The solemn proclamation of the enserfment of the Russian peasantry was followed, here too, by the swift desuetude of the Estates system. Within a decade the Zemsky Sobor had effectively faded away, while the monarchy built up a large semi-permanent army that eventually superseded the old gentry levies altogether. The last, token Zemsky Sobor passed into oblivion in 1683, by now a shadowy court claque. The social pact between the Russian monarchy and aristocracy was sealed, establishing absolutism in exchange for finalizing serfdom.
There was a comparable synchronism of developments in Bohemia, within much the same period, if in the differing context of the Thirty Years’ War. The Treaty of Westphalia which ended the long military struggle in 1648, consecrated the dual victory of the Habsburg monarchy over the Bohemian Estates, and the landed magnates over the Czech peasantry. The bulk of the old Czech aristocracy had been eliminated after the Battle of the White Mountain, and with it the political constitution which embodied their local power. The Verneuerte Landesordnung which now came into unchallenged effect concentrated all executive power in Vienna: the Estates – their traditional social leadership wiped out – were reduced to a perfunctory ceremonial role. The autonomy of the towns was crushed. In the countryside, ruthless measures of enserfment followed, on the great estates. The wholesale prescriptions and confiscations of the former Czech nobility and gentry created a new, cosmopolitan aristocracy of military adventurers and court functionaries, which together with the Church henceforward controlled nearly three-quarters of all lands in Bohemia. Demographic losses were enormous after the Thirty Years’ War, creating acute labour shortages. The labour services of the robot soon reached half the working week, while feudal dues, tithes and taxes could take up to two-thirds of the peasants’ produce.9 Austrian Absolutism, checked in Germany, triumphed in Bohemia; and with it, the remaining liberties of the Czech peasantry were extinguished. Thus in all three regions, the consolidation of landlord control over the peasantry, and discrimination against the towns, was tied to a sharp increase in the prerogatives of the monarchy and was succeeded by a disappearance of the estates system.
The cities of Eastern Europe, as we have seen, had been generally curtailed and repressed in the late mediaeval depression. The economic upswing throughout the continent in the 16th century, however, fostered a new if uneven urban growth in certain zones of the East. From 1550 onwards, the Bohemian towns regained much of their prosperity, although under the aegis of urban patriciates closely linked to the nobility by municipal landownership, and without the popular vitality which had once distinguished them in the Hussite epoch. In East Prussia, Königsberg still remained a robust outpost of burgher autonomy. In Russia, Moscow had burgeoned after the formal emergence of the Tsardom with Ivan III, benefiting notably from the long-distance trade between Europe and Asia that crossed Russia, in which the older mercantile centres of Novgorod and Pskov also participated. The maturation of the Absolutist States in the 17th century now effectively dealt a death-blow to the possibility of a revival of urban independence in the East. The new monarchies – Hohenzollern, Habsburg and Romanov – unshakeably assured the political supremacy of the nobility over the towns. The only corporate body seriously to resist the Gleichschaltung of the Great Elector after the Recess of 1653 was the city of Königsberg in East Prussia: it was crushed in 1662–3 and 1674, while the local junkers looked on.10 In Russia, Moscow itself lacked any substantial burgher class, trade being cornered by boyars, officials and a small ring of gosti merchants dependent on the government for their status and privileges: but it did contain numerous artisans, an anarchic semi-rural labour force, and the truculent and demoralized musketeers of the strel’tsy militia. The immediate cause of the convocation of the fateful Zemsky Sobor which promulgated the Sobornoe Ulozhenie had been a sudden explosion by these heterogeneous groups. Rioting mobs enraged by rising prices of basic commodities, following tax-increases by the Morozov administration, seized Moscow and forced the Tsar to flee the city, while disaffection rumbled in the rural provinces towards Siberia. Once royal control of the capital was regained, the Zemsky Sobor was summoned, and the Ulozhenie decreed. Novgorod and Pskov revolted against fiscal exactions, and were definitively suppressed, ceasing to have any economic importance thereafter. The last urban tumults in Moscow occurred in 1662, when protesting craftsmen were easily subdued, and in 1683, when Peter I finally liquidated the strel’tsy. Thereafter, Russian towns gave no trouble to monarchy or aristocracy. In the Czech lands, the Thirty Years’ War finished off the pride and growth of the Bohemian and Moravian cities: the ceaseless devastations and sieges during the campaigns of the war, coupled with the cancellations of municipal autonomy after it, henceforward reduced them to passive counters within the Habsburg Empire.
The most fundamental domestic rationale of Eastern Absolutism, however, lay in the countryside. Its complex machinery of repression was essentially and primarily directed against the peasantry. The 17th century was an epoch of declining prices and population throughout most of Europe. In the East, wars and civil disasters had created particularly acute labour crises. The Thirty Years’ War had inflicted a brutal setback to the whole German economy east of the Elbe. There were demographic losses of up to 50 per cent in many districts of Brandenburg.11 In Bohemia, the total population declined from 1,700,000 to less than 1,000,000 by the signature of the Peace of Westphalia.12 In the Russian lands, the intolerable strain of the Livonian Wars and the Oprichnina had led to a calamitous depopulation and evacuation of Central Russia in the last years of the 16th century; from 76 to 96 per cent of the settlements in the province of Moscow itself were abandoned.13 The Time of Troubles, with its civil wars, foreign invasions and rural rebellions, then compounded the instability and scarcity of the work-force at the disposal of the landowning class. The demographic down-turn of this epoch thus created, or aggravated, a constant shortage of rural labour for demesne cultivation There was, moreover, a permanent regional background to this phenomenon: the endemic problem for Eastern feudalism of the land/labour ratio – the existence of too few peasants scattered over too vast spaces. A comparison may give some idea of the contrast of conditions with those of Western Europe: the population density of Russia in the 17th century was 3 to 4 persons per square kilometre, at a time when that of France was 40, or some 10 times greater.14 In the fertile lands of South-Eastern Poland and Western Ukraine, the richest agricultural zone of the Rzeczspospolita, demographic density was little more – some 3 to 7 persons per square kilometre.15 Most of the Central Hungarian Plain – now the borderlands between the Austrian and Turkish Empires – was equally depopulated. The first objective of the landlord class was thus everywhere, not so much as in the West to fix the level of dues to be paid by the peasant, as to arrest the mobility of the villager and bind him to the estates. Conversely, over huge areas of Eastern Europe, the most typical and effective form of class struggle waged by the peasantry was simply flight – collective desertion of the land for uninhabited and uncharted spaces beyond.
The measures taken by the Prussian, Austrian and Czech nobility to prevent this traditional mobility in the late mediaeval epoch have already been described; they were naturally intensified in the inaugural era of Absolutism. Farther east, in Russia and Poland, the problem was even more serious. No stable frontiers or boundaries of settlement existed in the wide Pontic hinterlands lying between the two countries; the deeply forested North of Russia was traditionally a zone of ‘black-earth’ peasantry beyond seigneurial control; while Western Siberia and the Volga-Don region in the South-East constituted remote, trackless expanses still in the process of gradual colonization. Uncovenanted rural emigration in all these directions offered the possibility of escaping manorial exploitation for independent peasant farming in frontier conditions, however harsh. Throughout the 17th century, the whole, long drawn-out process of the enserfment of Russian peasantry must be set against this inchoate natural context: a huge, friable margin existed all round the pattern of noble land-holdings. Thus it is a historical paradox that Siberia was being opened up largely by peasant smallholders from the ‘black-earth’ communities of the North, seeking greater personal freedom and economic opportunities, during the very period when the great mass of the central peasantry was sinking into abject bondage.16 It was this absence of normal territorial fixitude in Russia that accounts for the striking survival of slavery on a very considerable scale; in the later 16th century, slaves still cultivated some 9–15 per cent of Russian estates.17 For, as has repeatedly been seen, the presence of rural slavery in a feudal social formation always signifies that the system of serfdom itself is not yet closed, and that considerable numbers of direct producers in the countryside are still obversely free. The possession of slaves was one of the great assets of the boyar class, giving them a critical economic advantage on their estates over the smaller service gentry:18 it ceased to be necessary only when the net of enserfment had drawn tight over virtually the whole Russian peasantry in the 18th century. Meanwhile, there was unremitting inter-feudal competition for control of ‘souls’ to cultivate noble or clerical lands: boyars and monasteries with more profitable and rational manors often took in fugitive serfs from smaller estates, obstructing their recovery by their former masters, to the fury of the squire-class. It was not until a stable and powerful central autocracy was established, with a coercive state apparatus capable of enforcing adscription throughout Russian territory, that these conflicts were suspended. It was thus the constant seigneurial preoccupation with the problem of labour mobility in the East which undoubtedly lay behind much of the internal drift towards Absolutism.19 Seigneurial laws tying the peasantry to the soil had already been widely passed in the preceding epoch. But as we have seen, their implementation usually remained very imperfect: actual labour patterns by no means always corresponded to the provisions of statute-books. The mission of Absolutism was everywhere to convert juridical theory into economic practice. A ruthlessly centralized and unitary repressive apparatus was an objective necessity for the surveillance and suppression of widespread rural mobility in times of economic depression; no mere network of individual landlord jurisdictions, no matter how despotic, could be wholly adequate to cope with the problem. The domestic policing functions necessary for the second serfdom in the East were in this respect more exigent than those needed for the first serfdom in the West: the result was to render possible an Absolutist State in advance of the relations of production on which it was founded, contemporary with that of the West in the transition beyond serfdom.
Poland, again, was the apparent exception to the logic of this process. But just as externally it paid the penalty of the Swedish Deluge for not producing an Absolutism, so internally the price of its failure was the greatest peasant insurrection of the epoch – the ordeal of the Ukrainian Revolution of 1648, which cost it a third of its territory and dealt szlachta morale and prowess a blow from which it never fully recovered: which was, indeed, the immediate prelude to the Swedish War, with which it interlocked. The peculiar character of the Ukrainian Revolution was the direct result of the basic problem of peasant mobility and flight in the East.20 For it was a rebellion set off by relatively privileged ‘cossacks’ in the Dnieper region, who were in origin fugitive Russian or Ruthenian peasants, or Circassian highlanders, who had settled in the vast borderlands between Poland, Russia and the Tartar Khanate of the Crimea. In these no man’s lands, they had come to adopt a semi-nomadic, equestrian mode of life similar to that of the Tartars against whom they customarily fought. Over time, a complex social structure had developed in the Cossack communities. Their political and military centre came to be the fortified island or seek below the Dnieper rapids, created in 1557 – which formed a warrior encampment, organized into regiments which elected delegates to a council of officers or starshina, that in turn selected a supreme commander or Hetman. Outside the Zaporozhe seek, roving bands of brigands and foresters mingled with settled villages of farmers under their own elders. The Polish nobility, when it encountered these communities in its expansion into the Ukraine, had found it necessary to tolerate the armed force of the Zaporozhian Cossacks in a limited number of ‘registered’ regiments technically under Polish command. Cossack troops were used as mounted auxiliaries in Polish campaigns into Moldavia, Livonia and Russia, and successful officers came to constitute a propertied elite, dominating the rank-and-file Cossacks, sometimes eventually becoming Polish nobles themselves.
This social convergence with the local szlachta, who had steadily extended their lands eastwards, did not alter the military anomaly of the regimental independence of the seek, with its semi-popular free-booting basis; nor did it affect the clusters of agricultural cossacks living among the serf population tilling the latifundia of the Polish aristocracy in the region. Peasant mobility had thus given birth in the Pontic grasslands to a sociological phenomenon virtually unknown in the West at the time – commoner rural masses capable of fielding organized armies against a feudal aristocracy. The sudden mutiny of the registered companies under their Hetman Khmelnitsky in 1648 was thus professionally able to take on Polish armies sent against them, and their rebellion in its turn set off a vast general rising of the serfs of the Ukraine, who fought side by side with the poor Cossack peasantry to throw off their Polish landlords. Three years later, the Polish peasants themselves revolted in the Cracow region of Podhale, in an agrarian movement inspired by that of the Ukrainian cossacks and serfs. A savage social war was waged in Galicia and the Ukraine, in which the szlachta armies were repeatedly worsted by Zaporozhian forces. It ended with the fateful transfer of allegiance by Khmelnitsky from Poland to Russia at the Treaty of Pereyaslavl in 1654, which brought the whole of the Ukraine beyond the Dnieper under the rule of the Tsars, and secured the interests of the Cossack starshina21 The Ukrainian peasantry – Cossack and non-Cossack – were the victims of the operation: the ‘pacification’ of the Ukraine with the integration of the officer corps into the Russian State restored their bonds. Eventually, indeed, after a long evolution, Cossack squadrons were to form an elite corps of the Tsarist Autocracy. The Treaty of Pereyaslavl symbolized, in effect, the respective parabola of the two great rivals of the region in the 17th century. The parcellized Polish State proved unable to defeat and subordinate the Cossacks, just as it failed to resist the Swedes. The centralized Tsarist autocracy was able to do both – repel the Swedish threat and not only subjugate, but in the end utilize the Cossacks as repressive dragoons against its own masses.
The Ukrainian rising was the most formidable peasant war of the epoch in the East. But it was not the only one. All the major East European nobilities were at one time or another in the 17th century confronted with serf rebellions. In Brandenburg, there were repeated outbreaks of rural violence in the central district of Prignitz, during the closing phase of the Thirty Years’ War and the decade which succeeded it: in 1645, 1646, 1648, 1650 and again in 1656.22 The concentration of princely power by the Great Elector must be seen against this background of unrest and despair in the villages. The Bohemian peasantry, subjected to a steady degradation of its economic and legal position after the Treaty of Westphalia, rose against its lords across the country in 1680, when Austrian troops had to be dispatched to suppress them. Above all, in Russia itself, there was an unequalled record of rural insurrections, which stretched from the Time of Troubles at the turn of the 17th century to the era of the Enlightenment in the 18th century. In 1606–7, peasants, plebeians and cossacks in the Dnieper region seized provincial power under the ex-slave Bolotnikov; their armies nearly installed the False Dimitri as Tsar in Moscow. In 1633–4, serfs and deserters in the war zone of Smolensk revolted under the peasant Balash. In 1670–1, virtually the whole of the South-East, from Astrakhan to Simbirsk, threw off landlord control as teeming armies of peasants and cossacks marched up the Volga valley led by the bandit Razin. In 1707–8, the rural masses of the Lower Don followed the cossack Bulavin in a fierce rebellion against the increased tax-loads and forced labour in the ship-yards imposed by Peter I. Finally, in 1773–4, there occurred the last and most formidable insurrection of all: the awesome rising of multiple exploited populations from the foothills of the Urals and the deserts of Bashkiria to the shores of the Caspian, commanded by Pugachev, which mingled mountain and steppe cossacks, empressed factory workers, peasants of the plains, and pastoral tribes in a series of risings that necessitated the full-scale deployment of the Russian imperial armies to be defeated.
All these popular revolts originated in the indeterminate borderlands of Russian territory: Galicia, Belorussia, Ukraine, Astrakhan, Siberia. For there the power of the central state dwindled and shifting masses of free-booters, adventurers and fugitives mixed with settled serfs and noble estates: the four largest rebellions were all led by armed Cossack elements, who provided the military experience and organization which made them so dangerous to the feudal class. Significantly, it was with the final closure of the Ukrainian and Siberian frontiers in the late 18th century, after Potemkin’s colonization schemes were completed, that the Russian peasantry was finally beaten into sullen quiescence. Thus throughout Eastern Europe, the intensity of class struggle in the countryside – always latent in the form of rural flights – also detonated peasant explosions against serfdom in which the collective power and property of the nobility was frontally threatened. The planar social geography of most of the region, which distinguished it from the more segmented space of Western Europe,23 could lend this menace particularly serious forms. The widespread danger from their own serfs consequently acted as a general centripetal force on the Eastern aristocracies. The ascent of the Absolutist State in the 17th century ultimately answered to social fear: its politico-military apparatus of coercion was the guarantee of the stability of serfdom. There was thus an internal order to Absolutism in the East that complemented its external determination: the function of the centralized State was to defend the class position of the feudal nobility against both its rivals abroad and its peasants at home. The organization and discipline of the one and the fluidity and contumacy of the other dictated a quickened political unity. The Absolutist State was thus reduplicated beyond the Elbe, to become a general European phenomenon.
What were the specific traits of the Eastern variant of this fortified feudal machine? Two basic and inter-related peculiarities may be singled out. Firstly, the influence of war in its structure was even more preponderant than in the West, and took unprecedented forms. Prussia represents perhaps the extreme limit reached by the militarization of the genesis of this State. Functional focus on war here effectively reduced the nascent State apparatus to a by-product of the military machine of the ruling class. The Absolutism of the Great Elector of Brandenburg was, as we have seen, born amidst the turmoil of the Swedish expeditions across the Baltic in the 1650’s. Its internal evolution and articulation was to represent an expressive fulfilment of Treitschke’s dictum: ‘War is the father of culture and the mother of creation.’ For the entire tax-structure, civil service and local administration of the Great Elector came into being as technical sub-departments of the Generalkriegskommissariat. From 1679 onwards, during the war with Sweden, this unique institution became, under the command of Von Grumbkow, the supreme organ of Hohenzollern Absolutism. The Prussian bureaucracy, in other words, was born as an offshoot of the Army. The Generalkriegskommissariat formed an omnicompetent war and finance ministry which not only maintained the standing army, but collected taxes, regulated industry and provided the provincial officialdom of the Brandenburger State. The great Prussian historian Otto Hintze described the development of this structure into the next century: The whole organization of officialdom was interlocked with military objectives and designed to serve them. The very provincial police officials were derived from the war commissariats. Every Minister of State was simultaneously entitled a War Minister, every councillor in the administrative and fiscal chambers was simultaneously entitled a war councillor. One-time officers became provincial councillors, or indeed presidents and ministers; the administrative officials were mostly recruited from former regimental quarter-masters and auditors; the lower positions were filled as much as possible with retired ncos and war invalids. The entire State thus acquired a military trim. The whole social system was placed in the service of militarism. Nobles, burghers and peasants were merely there, each in their own sphere, to serve the State and travailler pour le roi de Prusse.’24 By the end of the 18th century, the percentage of the population enrolled in the Army was perhaps 4 times higher than that of contemporary France,25 and was typically replenished by ruthless pressganging of foreign peasants and deserters. Junker control of its command was virtually absolute. This formidable military machine regularly absorbed some 70–80 per cent of the fiscal revenues of the State by the time of Frederick II.26
Austrian Absolutism, as will be seen, was always much more heteroclite in structure, exhibiting an imperfect compound of Western and Eastern traits, befitting its mixed territorial basis in Central Europe. No concentration comparable to that of Berlin ever prevailed in Vienna. But it is nevertheless noticeable that within the eclectic administrative system of the Habsburg State, much of the hard centre and innovating impetus from the mid 16th to the late 18th centuries derived from the Imperial military complex. Indeed, for a long time, it was this alone which gave practical reality to the dynastic unity of the disparate lands ruled by the Habsburgs. Thus the Supreme War Council or Hofkriegsrat was the only governing body with jurisdiction throughout the Habsburg territories in the 16th century, the sole executive agency uniting them under the ruling line. In addition to its defense duties against the Turks, the Hofkriegsrat was responsible for direct civil administration of the whole band of territory along the south-eastern frontier of Austria and Hungary, which was garrisoned with Grenzer militias subject to it. Its subsequent role in the slow growth of Habsburg centralization, and the construction of a developed Absolutism, was always a determinant one. ‘Probably of all the central organs of government, it was ultimately the most influential in assisting the unification of the various hereditary territories, and all, including Bohemia and particularly Hungary, for the protection of which it had been primarily designed, accepted its supreme control over military affairs.’27 The professional army which emerged after the Thirty Years War sealed the victory of the dynasty over the Bohemian Estates: maintained by the taxes of the Bohemian and Austrian lands, it became the first permanent apparatus of government in both realms, remaining without a real civilian equivalent for over a century. In the Magyar lands, too, it was the extension of the Habsburg army into Hungary in the early 18th century which finally drew it into a closer political union with the other dynastic possessions. Absolutist power here dwelt exclusively within the military branch of the State: Hungary henceforward provided cantonments and troops for the Habsburg armies, which occupied geographical terrain that otherwise remained constitutionally beyond bounds for the rest of the Imperial administration. At the same time, the newly conquered territories further to the East, wrested from the Turks, were put under army control: Transylvania and the Banat were managed directly by the Supreme War Council in Vienna, which organized and supervised the systematic colonization of these lands by German immigrants. The machinery of war was thus always the most constant escort of the development of Austrian Absolutism. But the Austrian armies nonetheless never achieved the position of their Prussian counterparts: the militarization of the State was checked by the limits to its centralization. The ultimate lack of a rigorous political unity in the Habsburg domains was to prevent any comparable elevation of the military establishment within Austrian Absolutism.
The role of the military apparatus in Russia, on the other hand, was scarcely less great than in Prussia. In his discussion of the historical specificity of the Muscovite Empire, Kliuchevsky commented: ‘The first of these peculiarities was the war-like organization of the State. The Muscovite Empire was Great Rus in arms.’28 The most celebrated masons of this edifice, Ivan IV and Peter I, both designed their basic administrative system to augment Russian war capacity. Ivan IV tried to reshuffle the whole land-holding pattern of Muscovy to convert it to service tenure, increasingly committing the nobility to permanent military duties in the Muscovite State. ‘Land became an economic means of securing to the State a sufficiency of military service, while landownership by the official class became the basis of a system of national defense.’29 Warfare was perennial throughout most of the 16th century, with Swedes, Poles, Lithuanians, Tartars and other antagonists. Ivan IV finally plunged into the long Livonian Wars which ended in a generalized catastrophe in the 1580’s. The Time of Troubles and the subsequent consolidation of the Romanov dynasty, however, developed the basic trend of linking ownership of land to a build-up of the army. Peter I then gave this system its most implacable and universal form. All land became liable for military duty, and all nobles had to start indefinite State service at the age of 15. Two-thirds of the members of every noble family had to enter the Army: only every third son was allowed to do his service in the civilian bureaucracy.30 Peter’s military and naval expenses in 1724 totalled 75 per cent of State revenues31 – for one of the few years of peace of his reign.
The overwhelming focus of the Absolutist State on war was not supererogatory. It corresponded to much greater upheavals of conquest and expansion than occurred in the West. The cartography of Eastern Absolutism closely corresponded to its dynamic structure. Muscovy multiplied some twelve times over in size during the 15th and 16th centuries, absorbing Novgorod, Kazan and Astrakhan; the Russian State then expanded steadily in the 17th century by annexing the Western Ukraine and part of Belorussia; while in the 18th century it seized the Baltic lands, the rest of the Ukraine and Crimea. Brandenburg acquired Pomerania in the 17th century; the Prussian State then doubled its size by the conquest of Silesia in the 18th century. The Habsburg State, based in Austria, reconquered Bohemia in the 17th century, had subdued Hungary by the 18th century, and annexed Croatia, Transylvania and Oltenia in the Balkans. Finally, Russia, Prussia and Austria divided the whole of Poland between them – once the largest state in Europe. The rationality and necessity of a ‘super-absolutism’ for the feudal class in the East received in this final denouement a symmetrical demonstration, from the example of its absence. The manorial reaction of the Prussian and Russian nobles was completed by a perfected Absolutism. Their Polish homologues, after no less ferocious a subjection of the peasantry, failed to generate one. By thus jealously preserving the individual rights of every squireen against every other, and all against any dynasty, the Polish gentry committed collective suicide. Their pathological fear of a central state power institutionalized a nobiliary anarchy. The result was predictable: Poland was wiped off the map by its neighbours, who demonstrated on the battle-field the higher necessity of the Absolutist State.
The extreme militarization of the State was structurally linked to the second major peculiarity of Absolutism in both Prussia and Russia. This lay in the nature of the functional relationship between the feudal landowners and the Absolutist monarchies. The critical difference between the Eastern and Western variants can be seen in the respective modes of integration of the nobility into the new bureaucracy created by them. In neither Prussia nor Russia did sale of offices exist on any considerable scale. The Ostelbian junkers had been characterized by grasping public greed in the 16th century, when there was generalized corruption and malversation of state funds, farming of sinecures, and manipulations of royal credit.32 This was to be the epoch of unchallenged domination by the Herrenstand and Ritterschat, and enfeeblement of any central public authority. The advent of Hohenzollern Absolutism in the 17th century radically altered the situation. The new Prussian State henceforward enforced an increasing financial probity in its administration. Purchase of profitable positions in the bureaucracy by nobles was not permitted. Significantly, only in the much more socially advanced Hohenzollern enclaves of Cleves and Mark in the Rhineland, where there was a flourishing urban bourgeoisie, was purchase of office formally sanctioned by Frederick William I and his successors.33 In Prussia itself, the civil service was on the whole remarkable for its conscientious professionalism. In Russia, on the other hand, frauds and embezzlement were endemic in the Muscovite and Romanov State machines, which regularly lost a large proportion of their revenues in this way. But this phenomenon was merely a straightforward and primitive variety of peculation and theft, if on a huge and chaotic scale. Sale of offices proper – as a regulated and legal system of recruitment to the bureaucracy – never became seriously established in Russia. Nor was it ever a significant practice in the relatively more advanced Austrian State either, which – unlike some of its princely neighbours in South Germany – never harboured an ‘officer’ class that had purchased its administrative positions. The reasons for the general Eastern disjuncture from the Western pattern are evident. S wart’s comprehensive study of the distribution of the phenomenon of sale of offices justly emphasizes its connection with the existence of a local commercial class.34 In other words, in the West, sale of offices corresponded to the over-determination of the late feudal state by the swift growth of mercantile and manufacturing capital. The contradictory nexus which it established between public office and private persons reflected mediaeval conceptions of sovereignty and contract, in which an impersonal civic order did not exist; yet this was simultaneously a cash nexus, reflecting the presence and interference of a monetary economy and its future masters, the urban bourgeoisie. Merchants, lawyers and bankers had access to the State machine if they could unbelt the sums necessary to buy positions in it. The exchange nature of the transaction was also, of course, an index of the intra-class relationship between the ruling aristocracy and its State: unification by corruption rather than coercion produced a milder and more advanced Absolutism.
In the East, on the other hand, there was no urban bourgeoisie to inflect the character of the Absolutist State; it was not tempered by a mercantile sector. The stiflingly anti-urban policies of the Prussian and Polish nobility have already been seen. In Russia, the Tsars controlled trade – frequently through their own monopoly enterprises – and administered the towns. Uniquely, urban residents were often serfs. The result was to make the hybrid phenomenon of sale of offices impracticable. Undiluted feudal principles were to govern the construction of the State machine. The device of a service nobility was in many respects the Eastern correlate of sale of offices in the West. The Prussian junker class was incorporated directly into the War Commissariat and its financial and tax services, by recruitment to the State. In the civilian bureaucracy, there was always an important leavening of non-aristocratic elements, although these were normally ennobled once they reached the top positions in it.35 In the countryside, the junkers maintained rigorous control of the local Gutsbezirke and were thus vested with a complete panoply of fiscal, juridical, police and conscription powers over their peasants. The provincial bureaucratic organs of the 18th century civil service, the suggestively entitled Kriegs-und-Domänen-Kammern (War-and-Manorial Chambers) were likewise increasingly dominated by them. In the Army itself, officer command was the professional reserve of the landowning class. ‘Only young noblemen were admitted into the cadet companies and schools which he (Frederick William I) founded, and noble non-commissioned officers were listed by name in the quarterly returns made to his son: indicating that noblemen were eo ipso considered to be officer aspirants. Although many commoners were commissioned under the stress of the war of the Spanish Succession, they were purged soon after its end. Thus the nobility became a service nobility; it identified its interests with those of the State which gave them positions of honour and profit.’36
In Austria, there was no such compact fit between the Absolutist State apparatus and the aristocracy; the insurmountable heterogeneity of the landed classes of the Habsburg realms effectively precluded it. Yet a drastic if incomplete sketch for a service nobility occurred there too: for the Habsburg reconquest of Bohemia in the Thirty Years’ War was followed by the systematic destruction of the old Czech and German aristocracy of the Bohemian lands, which were planted with a new and foreign nobility, of Catholic faith and cosmopolitan origins, which owed its estates and fortunes entirely to the fiat of the dynasty that had created it. The new ‘Bohemian’ aristocracy henceforward provided the dominant contingent of cadres to the Habsburg State, becoming the major social basis of Austrian Absolutism. But the abrupt radicalism of its construction from above was not reproduced in the subsequent forms of its integration into the State machine: the composite dynastic polity ruled by the Habsburgs rendered a uniform or ‘regulated’ bureaucratic cooption of the nobility into the service of Absolutism impossible.37 Military positions above certain ranks and after certain periods of duty were to confer titles automatically: but no general or institutionalized linkage between State service and the aristocratic order emerged, to the ultimate detriment of the international strength of Austrian Absolutism.
In the more primitive environment of Russia, on the other hand, the principles of a service nobility were to go much further even than in Prussia. There, Ivan IV promulgated a decree in 1556 which made military service obligatory for every lord, and laid down precise allocations of warriors to be supplied from given units of land, thereby consolidating the pomeshchik class of gentry which had started to emerge under his predecessor. Conversely, only persons performing State service could henceforward technically own land in Russia, apart from religious institutions. This system never achieved the universality or efficacy in practice which was conferred on it by law, and by no means ended the autonomous power of the anterior magnate class of boyars whose estates remained in allodial tenure. But despite many zigzags and reverses, Ivan’s successors inherited and developed his work. Blum comments on the first Romanov ruler: ‘The State over which Michael was called to rule was a unique kind of political organization. It was a Service State and the tsar was its absolute ruler. The activities and obligations of all subjects, from the greatest lord to the meanest peasant, were determined by the State in the pursuit of its own interests and policies. Every subject was bound to certain specific functions that were designed to preserve and aggrandise the power and authority of the State. The seigniors were bound to do service in the army and bureaucracy, and the peasants were bound to the seigniors to provide them with the means to perform their state service. Whatever freedoms or privileges a subject might enjoy were his only because the State allowed them to him as a perquisite of the function he performed in its service.’38 This is a rhetorical evocation of the claims of Tsarist autocracy or samoderzhavie, not a description of the actual state structure itself: the practical realities of the Russian social formation were far from corresponding to the omnipotent political system suggested by it. The ideological theory of Russian Absolutism never coincided with its material powers, which were always much more limited than contemporary Western observers – often prone to travellers’ exaggeration – tended to believe. Yet in any comparative European perspective, the peculiarity of the Muscovite service complex was nevertheless unmistakeable. In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Peter I generalized and radicalized its normative principles yet further. By merging conditional and hereditary estates, he assimilated the pomeshchik and boyar classes. Every noble henceforward had to become a permanent servitor of the Tsar. The State bureaucracy was divided into fourteen ranks, the top eight of which involved hereditary noble status, and the bottom six non-hereditary aristocratic status. In this way, feudal rank and bureaucratic hierarchy were organically fused: the device of the service nobility in principle made the State a virtual simulacrum of the structure of the landowning class, under the centralized power of its ‘absolute’ delegate.

1. See Zs. Pach, Die ungarische Agrarentwicklung im 16–17 Jahrhundert, pp. 38–41, 53–6, for the phases of this process and the impact of the Thirteen Years’ War itself on the condition of the peasantry.
2. The real index of monetarization of the different West European agricultures in the 16th and 17th centuries was probably much lower than is often thought. Jean Meuvret remarks that in 16th century France, ‘the peasantry lived virtually everywhere in a regime of domestic quasi-autarchy’, while ‘the daily life of artisans, including petty-bourgeois, was effectively regulated by the same principle, namely to live above all from foods cultivated on the soil in their possession and otherwise to buy and sell a minimum’; for ‘to satisfy ordinary needs, the use of gold or even silver coins was in no way necessary. For the small number of exchange transactions that were indispensable it was often possible to dispense with money.’ Jean Meuvret, ‘Circulation Monétaire et Utilisation Economique de la Monnaie dans la France du XVIe et du XVIIe Siècle’, Etudes d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 1947, Vol. I, p. 20. Porshnev aptly characterizes the general situation as one defined by the ‘contradiction between the monetary form and the natural basis of the feudal economy’ in this epoch, and comments that the fiscal difficulties of Absolutism were everywhere rooted in this contradiction: Les Soulèvements Populaires en France, p. 558.
3. See J. V. Polišensky, The Thirty Years’ War, London 1971, pp. 224–31.
4. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, p. 179. Gustavus Adolphus had a few years earlier seized the strategic fortresses of Memel and Pillau in East Prussia, which commanded access to Königsberg, and levied Swedish tolls there: op. cit., pp. 205–6.
5. On the eve of Ivan IV’s attack on the Tartar Khanate of Kazan in 1552, there are supposed to have been 100,000 Russian slaves there. The total number of slaves captured by Tartar raids from the Crimea in the first half of the 17th century was upwards of 200,000: G. Vernadsky, The Tsardom of Moscow 1547–1682, I, Yale 1969, pp. 51–4, 12.
6. J. H. Billington, The Icon and the Axe, London 1966, p. 110; this is a subject which invites further research.
7. For an acknowledgement of this by a Russian historian, see A. N. Chistoz-vonov, ‘Nekotorye Aspekty Problemy Genezisa Absoliutizma’, Voprosy Istorii, No. 5, May 1968, pp. 60–1. Although it contains some wild judgments (on Spain, for example), this comparative essay is probably the best recent Soviet discussion of the origins of Absolutism, in Eastern and Western Europe.
8. When the foregathered nobles recorded their melancholy conviction in Brandenburg that the ancient privileges of the Estates were virtually ‘annulled and emaciated so that no umbra libertatis seemed to be left’. Cit. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, p. 200.
9. Polišensky, The Thirty Years’ War, p. 245.
10. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 212–14, 220–1.
11. Stoye, Europe Unfolding 1648–1688, p. 31.
12. Polišensky, The Thirty Years’ War, p. 245.
13. R. H. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change in Muscovy, p. 95.
14. R. Mousnier, Peasant Uprisings, pp. 157, 159.
15. P. Skwarczyński, ‘Poland and Lithuania’, The New Cambridge Modern History of Europe, III, Cambridge 1968, p. 377.
16. A. N. Sakharov, ‘O Dialektike Istoricheskovo Razvitiya Russkovo Krest’yanstva’, Voprosy Istorii, No. 1, January 1970, pp. 26–7, emphasizes this contrast.
17. Mousnier, Peasant Uprisings, pp. 174–5.
18. See Vernadsky’s notable paper, ‘Serfdom in Russia’, X Congresso Internazionale di Scienze Storiche, Relazioni III, Florence 1955, pp. 247–72, which rightly points out the importance of rural slavery in Russia as a peculiarity of the agrarian system.
19. Some idea of the scale of the problem for the ruling class in Russia can be gained from the fact that as late as 1718–19, long after the legal consolidation of general serfdom, the census conducted by Peter I unearthed no less than 200,000 fugitive serfs, amounting to some 3 -4 per cent of the total subject population, who were repatriated to their former masters. See M. Ya. Volkov, ‘O Stanovlenii Absoliutizma v Rossii’, Istoriya SSSR, January 1970, p. 104.
20. For a full account of Ukrainian social structure and the revolution of 1648–54, see Vernadsky, The Tsardom of Moscow, I, pp. 439–81.
21. For the negotiations and provisions of the Treaty of Pereyaslavl, see the succinct account in C. B. O’Brien, Muscovy and the Ukraine, Berkeley-Los Angeles 1963, pp. 21–7.
22. Stoye, Europe Unfolding 1648–1688, p. 30.
23. The contrast between the endless, flat topography of the East, which facilitated flights, and the more accidented and confined relief of the West, which assisted labour control, is emphasized by Lattimore, ‘Feudalism in History’, pp. 55–6, and Mousnier, Peasant Uprisings, pp. 157, 159.
24. Hintze, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, I, p. 61.
25. Dorn, Competition for Empire, p. 94.
26. A. J. P. Taylor, The Course of German History, London 1961, p. 19.
27. H. F. Schwarz, Thji Imperial Privy Council in the Seventeenth Century, Harvard 1943, p. 26.
28. V. O. Kliuchevsky, A History of Russia, II, London 1912, p. 319.
29. Kliuchevsky, op. cit., p. 120.
30. M. Beloff, ‘Russia’, in Goodwin (ed.), The European Nobility in the 18th Century, pp. 174–5.
31. V. O. Kliuchevsky, A History of Russia, Vol. IV, pp. 144–5.
32. Hans Rosenberg, ‘The Rise of die Junkers in Brandenberg-Prussia 1410–1563; American Historical Review, October 1943, p. 20.
33. Hans Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and Autocracy – The Prussian Experience 1680–1815, Cambridge 1958, p. 78.
34. K. W. Swart, Sale of Offices in the Seventeenth Century, p. 96.
35. Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and Autocracy, pp. 139–43.
36. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, p. 272.
37. Schwarz comments, however, that the old high nobility of the Habsburg State essentially owed its ascent to service in the Imperial Privy Council during the 17th century: The Imperial Privy Council in the Seventeenth Century, p. 410.
38. Jerome Blum, Lord and Peasant in Russia, p. 150.