08 -- Nobility and Monarchy: the Eastern Variant

2
Nobility and Monarchy: the Eastern Variant
It remains to establish the historical significance of the service nobility. This can best be done by looking at the evolution of the relationship between the feudal class and its State, this time in the East. It has been seen that prior to the expansion of Western feudalism eastwards in the Middle Ages, the mainly Slav social formations of Eastern Europe had nowhere produced a fully articulated feudal polity of the type which emerged from the Romano-Germanic synthesis in the West. All of them were at different stages in the transition from the inchoate tribal federations of the original settlements to stratified social hierarchies with stabilized State structures. The typical pattern, it will be remembered, combined a ruling warrior aristocracy with a heteroclite population of free peasants, debt peons and captured slaves; while the structure of the State was still often close to the retinue-system of the traditional military leader. Even Kievan Russia, the most advanced sector in the whole region, had not yet produced a unitary hereditary monarchy. The impact of Western feudalism on the social formations of the East has already been discussed at the level of its effects on the prevalent mode of production in the estates and villages, and on the organization of the towns. There has been less study of its influence on the nobility itself, but as we have seen, it is clear that there was an increasing adaptation to Western hierarchical norms within the ruling class. The higher aristocracy in Bohemia and Poland, for example, took shape precisely from the mid-12th to the early 14th centuries, the peak period of German expansion; it was also then that the Czech rytiri and vladky or knight class emerged, together with the magnate ibarones; while the use of crests and titles was adopted in both countries from Germany by the second half of the 13th century.1 Indeed, in most of the Eastern countries, the title system was borrowed from German (or later Danish) usages: Count, Margrave, Duke and so on were successively naturalized in the Slavonic languages.
Nevertheless, throughout both the era of economic expansion in the 11th to 13th centuries, and contraction in the 14th to 15th centuries, two critical features of the Eastern ruling classes can be noted, which date back to the absence of the Western feudal synthesis. Firstly, the institution of conditional tenure – the fief system proper – never really became entrenched beyond the Elbe.2 It is true that it did initially follow the path of German colonization, and always had more grip in the Ostelbian lands permanently occupied by German junkers than elsewhere. But the German estates which owed knight-service in the East were technically allodial in the 14th century, even though they bore military obligations.3 By the 15th century juridical fictions in Brandenburg were increasingly ignored, and the Rittergut was tending to become a patrimonial estate – in this respect, a process not unlike that which was occurring in West Germany. Elsewhere, too, conditional tenure generally failed to become firmly established. In Poland allodial estates outnumbered fiefs during the Middle Ages; but as in Eastern Germany, both types of property owed military service, although it was lighter on the former. From the second half of the 15th century onwards, the gentry successfully turned many feudal into allodial estates, against the efforts of the monarchy to reverse this process. From 1561 to 1588 the Sejm then passed enactments finally commuting feudal to allodial tenures everywhere.4 In Russia, as we have seen, the typical boyar property was always the allodial votchina; the imposition from above of the conditional pomest’e system was the later work of the Tsarist autocracy. In all these lands, moreover, there were few or no intermediary lordships between knights and monarchs, tenants-in-chief of the type which played such an important role in the compact feudal hierarchies of the West. Complex chains of rear-vassalage or sub-infeudation were effectively unknown. On the other hand, public authority never became so juridically limited or divided as in the mediaeval West either. Local administrative offices in all these lands were appointive rather than hereditary, and rulers retained the formal right to tax the whole peasant population, which was not subtracted from the public realm by integral private immunities or jurisdictions, although in practice the fiscal and legal powers of princes or dukes were often very limited. The result was a much less cohesive network of intra-feudal relationships than in the West.
There is little doubt that this pattern was linked to the spatial setting of Eastern feudalism. Just as the vast, sparsely populated tracts of land in the East created specific problems of labour exploitation for the nobility, because of the possibility of flights, so they also created special problems for a hierarchical integration of the nobility by princes and overlords. The frontier character of the Eastern social formations rendered it extremely difficult for dynastic rulers to enforce liege obedience from military settlers and landowners, in an unbounded milieu where armed adventurers and anarchic velleities were often at a premium. The result was that vertical feudal solidarity was much weaker than in the West. There were few organic ties binding the various aristocracies internally together. This situation was not substantially altered by the introduction of the manorial system during the great crisis of European feudalism. Demesne farming and servile labour now aligned Eastern agriculture more closely with the production norms of the early mediaeval West. But the seigneurial reaction which created them did not simultaneously reproduce the distinctive fief system that had accompanied it. One consequence of this, of course, was to concentrate seigneurial power over the peasantry to a degree unknown in the West, where parcellized sovereignty and scalar property created plural jurisdictions over villeins, with confusions and overlaps that were objectively propitious to peasant resistance. In Eastern Europe, by contrast, territorial, personal and economic lordship were generally fused in a single manorial authority, which exercised cumulative rights over its subject serfs.5 This concentration of powers could go so far that in Russia and Prussia serfs might actually be sold, apart from the estates on which they worked, to other landowners – a condition of personal dependence close to that of outright slavery. The manorial system thus did not initially affect the predominant type of aristocratic tenure of land, although it greatly enlarged it at the expense of village commons and peasant small-holdings. On the contrary, if anything it increased despotic local power within the seigneurial class.
The double pressures which eventually created an Absolutist State in the East have been outlined above. What is important to stress here is that the transition towards Absolutism could not take the same path as in the West, not only because of the nullification of the towns and the enserfment of the peasantry, but also because of the peculiar character of the nobility which accomplished these. It had experienced no long, secular adaptation into a relatively disciplined feudal hierarchy to prepare for its integration into an aristocratic Absolutism. Yet once confronted with the historical dangers of foreign conquest or peasant desertions, the nobility needed an instrument capable of endowing itself ex novo with an iron unity. The type of political integration realized by Absolutism in Russia and Prussia always bore the marks of this original class situation. Hitherto, we have emphasized the extent to which the clock of Absolutism in Eastern Europe ran fast: to which it was a State structure in advance of the social formations which supported it, because level with the Western States which were in front of them. It is now necessary to underline the converse of the same dialectical contraction. Precisely the construction of the ‘modern’ Absolutist edifice in the East necessitated the creation of the ‘archaic’ service relationship once characteristic of the fief system in the West. This relationship had never previously taken serious hold in the East; yet just as it was disappearing in the West with the advent of Absolutism, it was appearing in the East at the behest of Absolutism. Much the clearest case of this was, of course, Russia. The mediaeval centuries after the fall of the Kievan State had known mediatized political authority and mutual suzerain-vassal relationships between princes and nobles: but these were dissociated from manorial lordship and land tenure, which remained dominated by the allodial votchina of the boyar class.6 From the early modern epoch onwards, however, the whole progress of Tsarism was built on the conversion of allodial into conditional tenures, with the implantation of the pomest’e system in the 16th century, its domination over the votchina in the 17th century, and the eventual merging of the two in the 18th century. For the first time, land was now held in exchange for knight service to the feudal overlord – the Tsar, in a formal replica of the fief in the mediaeval West. In Prussia, there was no such radical juridical alteration of land tenure, apart from a large-scale resumption of the royal demesne after the alienations of the 16th century, because there the traces of a fief system still survived. But here too, the horizontal dispersal of the junker class was broken by a rigorous vertical integration into the Absolutist State under the ideological imperative of the universal duty of the noble class to serve its feudal suzerain. In fact, the ethos of military service to the State was to go much deeper in Prussia than in Russia, and eventually to produce perhaps the most devoted and disciplined aristocracy in Europe. There was thus correspondingly less need for the legal reformation and material constraint which Tsarism had to apply so ruthlessly in its efforts to force the Russian landowning class into military service for the State.7 In both cases, however, the ‘revival’ of the service relationship in Europe in fact inflicted a drastic modification of it. For the military service demanded was no longer simply to a liege lord in the mediatized chain of personal dependence that was the feudal hierarchy of the mediaeval epoch: it was to a hyper-centralized, Absolutist State.
There were two inevitable consequences to this displacement of the relationship. Firstly, the service involved was not the occasional and autonomous bearing of arms by a knight at the summons of his feudal superior – the conventional equestrian outing of forty days in the field stipulated in the Norman fief system, for example. It was an induction into a bureaucratic apparatus, and tended to become vocational and permanent in character. The extreme here was reached by the Petrine decrees which made the Russian dvoriantsvo legally liable for life-long service to the State. Once again, the very ferocity and irrealism of this system reflected the greater practical difficulty of integrating the Russian nobility into the Tsarist apparatus, rather than any greater degree of actual success in doing so. There was no need for such extreme measures in Prussia, where the junker class was smaller and more pliable from the start. In either case, it is evident that bureaucratic service proper – whether military or civilian – contradicts one central principle of the original feudal contract in the mediaeval epoch in the West: namely, its reciprocal nature. The fief system proper always contained an explicit component of mutuality: the vassal had not only duties to his lord, but also rights which the lord was bound to respect. Mediaeval law expressly included the notion of seigneurial felony – the illegal breaking of the compact by the feudal superior, not his inferior. Now it is plain that such a personal reciprocity, with its comparatively strict legal safeguards, was incompatible with a full-scale Absolutism, which presupposed a new and unilateral power of the central State apparatus. So, in fact, the second distinctive trait of the service relationship in the East was necessarily its heteronomy. The pomeshchik was not a vassal, with his own rights claimable against the tsar. Fie was a servitor, who received estates from the autocracy and was bound to unconditional obedience to it. His submission was legally direct and unequivocal, it was not mediatized through intervening instances of a feudal hierarchy. This extreme Tsarist conception never became assimilated in Prussia. But there too the critical element of mutuality was arrestingly lacking in the bond between the junker and the Hohenzollern State. The ideal of the Sergeant King was notoriously expressed in his demand: ‘I must be served with life and limb, with house and wealth, with honour and conscience, everything must be committed except eternal salvation – that belongs to God, but all else is mine.’8 Nowhere did the cult of mechanical military obedience – the Kadavergehorsamkeit of the Prussian bureaucracy and army – so come to permeate the landowning class. There was thus never a complete replication of the Western feudal synthesis in the East, either before or after the divide of the late mediaeval crisis. Rather, the component elements of this feudalism were strangely re-shuffled into listing and asynchronous combinations, none of which ever quite possessed the completion or unity of the original synthesis. Thus the manorial system functioned both under nobiliary anarchy and centralized absolutism; dispersed sovereignty existed but in epochs of non-conditional tenure; conditional tenures appeared, but with non-reciprocal service bonds; feudal hierarchy was eventually codified in the framework of state bureaucracy. Absolutism itself represented the most paradoxical reconjugation of all – in Western terms, a bizarre mixture of modern and mediaeval structures, consequence of the peculiar ‘squashed’ temporality of the East.
The adaptation of the landowners of Eastern Europe to the advent of Absolutism was itself not a smooth process, without vicissitudes, any more than it had been in the West. In fact, the Polish šlachta – alone of any such social class in Europe – defeated all efforts to create a strong dynastic state, for reasons which will be discussed later. In general, however, the relationship between monarchy and nobility in the East followed a trajectory not unlike that of the West, if with certain significant regional characteristics of its own. Thus comparative aristocratic insouciance prevailed during the 16th century, succeeded by widespread conflicts and turbulence in the 17th century, which then yielded to a new and confident concord in the 18th century. This political pattern was nevertheless distinct from that in the West in a number of important respects. To start with, the process of Absolutist State construction began much later in the East. There was no real equivalent to the Renaissance monarchies of Western Europe in the Eastern Europe of the same century. Brandenburg was still a provincial backwater without any notable princely power; Austria was entangled with the mediaeval Imperial system of the Reich; Hungary had lost its traditional dynasty and had been largely overrun by the Turks; Poland remained an aristocratic commonwealth; Russia experienced a premature and forced autocracy that soon collapsed. The only country which produced a genuine Renaissance culture was Poland, whose state system was virtually a nobiliary republic. The only country which witnessed a powerful proto-Absolutist monarchy was Russia, whose culture remained far more primitive than that of any other State in the region. Disjointed, both phenomena were shortlived. It was in the next century that durable Absolutist States were erected in the East, after the full military and diplomatic integration of the continent into a single international system, and the resultant pressure from the West that accompanied it.
The fate of the Estates of the region was everywhere the clearest index of the progress of Absolutization. The three strongest Estates systems of the East were those of Poland, Hungary and Bohemia – all of which claimed the constitutional right to elect their respective monarchs. The Polish Sejm, a bi-cameral assembly in which only nobles were represented, not only thwarted the ascent of any central royal authority in the Commonwealth after its momentous victories in the 16th century; it actually increased the anarchic prerogatives of the gentry with the introduction of the liberum veto in the 17th century, whereby any member of the Sejm could dissolve it by a single negative vote. The Polish case was unique in Europe: so unshakeable was the position of the aristocracy that there was not even a serious conflict between monarchy and nobility in this epoch, for no elective king ever accumulated sufficient power to challenge the szlachta constitution. In Hungary, on the other hand, the traditional Estates shocked frontally against the Habsburg dynasty when it moved towards administrative centralization from the late 16th century onwards. The Magyar gentry, bolstered by national particularism and sheltered by Turkish power, resisted Absolutism might and main: no other nobility in Europe was to have a record of such ferocious and persistent struggle against the encroachments of monarchy. No less than four times in the space of a hundred years – in 1604–8, 1620–1, 1678–82 and 1701–11, under Bocskay, Bethlen, Tökölli and Rakóczi – major sections of the Hungarian landowning class rose in armed rebellion against the Hofburg. At the end of this prolonged and virulent contest, Magyar separatism was effectively broken and Hungary henceforward occupied by unitary Absolutist armies, while the local serfs were subjected to central taxation. But in virtually every other respect, the privileges of the Estates were preserved, and Habsburg sovereignty in Hungary remained a dim shadow of its counterpart in Austria. In Bohemia, by contrast, the revolt of the Snem which precipitated the Thirty Years’ War was crushed at the Battle of the White Mountain in 1620: the victory of Austrian Absolutism in the Czech lands was complete and final, erasing the old Bohemian nobility altogether. The Estates systems formally survived in both Austria and Bohemia, but henceforward were normally obedient sounding-boxes of the dynasty.
In the two zones which gave birth to the most developed and dominant Absolutist States of Eastern Europe, however, the historical pattern was different. In Prussia and Russia, there were no great aristocratic rebellions against the oncoming of a centralized State. Indeed, it is noticeable that in the difficult phase of transition towards Absolutism, the nobility of these countries played a less prominent role in the political upheavals of the time than their counterparts in the West. The Hohenzollern and Romanov States never encountered any real equivalents of the Religious Wars, the Fronde, the Catalan Revolt or even the Pilgrimage of Grace. The Estates system in both countries petered out towards the end of the 17th century, without clamour or complaint. The Landtag of Brandenburg passively acquiesced in the increasing Absolutism of the Great Elector after the Recess of 1653. The only serious resistance to it came from the burghers of Königsberg: the East Prussian landowners, by contrast, accepted the Elector’s summary suppression of the ancient rights of the Duchy with relatively few qualms. The relentlessly anti-urban policies pursued by the Eastern nobilities here had their effect, once the process of Absolutization got under way.9 Relations between the dynasty and the nobility in Prussia were by no means free from tension and suspicion in the late 17th and early 18th centuries: neither the Great Elector nor the Sergeant King were popular rulers among their own class, which was often treated roughly by both of them. But no serious split between the monarchy and aristocracy, even of a transient character, ever developed in Prussia during this epoch. In Russia, the Estates Assembly – the Zemsky Sobor – was a particularly weak and factitious institution,10 originally created for tactical reasons by Ivan IV in the 16th century. Its composition and convocation were on the whole easily manipulated by the court cliques in the capital; the Estates principle as such never acquired an independent life in Muscovy. It was further weakened by the social divisions within the landowning class between the magnate boyar stratum and the petty pomeshchik gentry whose rise had been promoted by the Tsars of the 16th century.
Thus, although gigantic social struggles were unleashed in the course of the transition to Absolutism, on a scale far beyond anything in Western Europe, they were dominated by the exploited rural and urban classes, not by the privileged and propertied, who on the whole revealed considerable prudence in their relationship to Tsarism. ‘Throughout our history’, Count Stroganov was to write to Alexander I in a confidential memorandum, ‘it has been the peasantry that was the source of all disturbances, while nobility never stirred: if the government has any force to fear and any group to watch, it is the serfs and not any other class.’11 The great events of the 17th century which punctuated the fading away of the Zemsky Sobor and Boyar Duma were not separatist noble rebellions, but the peasant wars of Bolotnikov and Razin, urban riots by artisans in Moscow, upsurges of Cossack turmoil along the Dnieper and the Don. These conflicts provided the historical context within which the intra-feudal contradictions between boyars and pomeshchiki – themselves certainly acuter than anything in Prussia – were resolved. For much of the 17th century, boyar groups controlled the central machinery of the State in the absence of strong Tsars, while the gentry lost political ground; but the essential interests of both were protected by the new structures of Russian Absolutism, as it became gradually consolidated. Autocratic repression of individual aristocrats in Russia was, of course, often much fiercer than in the West, because of the lack of any equivalent to the latter’s mediaeval legal traditions. But it is nonetheless striking how stable the Russian monarchy could become, even while small court and military groups within the nobility waged feverish struggles for control of it: the strength of the Absolutist function so far surpassed that of its nominal royal occupants that after Peter I, political life could for a time become a hectic series of intrigues and putsches by palace guards without in any way altering the powers of Tsarism as such, or impairing political stability in the country as a whole.
The 18th century, in fact, witnessed the zenith of harmony between the aristocracy and monarchy in Prussia and Russia, as in Western Europe. This was the epoch in which the nobility of both countries adopted French as the cultural language of the ruling class, the idiom in which Catherine II was candidly to declare: Je suis une aristocrate, c’est mon métier – epigraph for the age.12 The consonance between the landowning class and the Absolutist State was, in fact, even greater in the two great monarchies of the East than in the West. The historical weakness of the mutual and contractual elements of feudal vassalage in Eastern Europe during an earlier epoch has already been noted. The service hierarchy of Prussian and Russian Absolutism never reproduced the reciprocal commitment of mediaeval homage: a bureaucratic pyramid necessarily excluded the inter-personal pledges of a seigneurial hierarchy, replacing allegiances by commands. But the supersession of individual guarantees between lord and vassal, which in principle ensured a chivalrous relationship between them, did not mean that nobles in the East were thereby delivered over to arbitrary or implacable tyranny by their monarchs. For the aristocracy as a class was collectively ratified in its social power by the objective nature of the State which had arisen ‘above’ it. The service of the nobility in the machinery of Absolutism ensured that the Absolutist State served the political interests of the nobility. The link between the two involved more constraint than in the West, but also more intimacy. The general rules of European Absolutism were thus – despite ideological appearances – never seriously infringed in the East. The private property and security of the landowning class remained the domestic talisman of royal regimes, no matter how autocratic their pretensions.13 The composition of the nobility might be forcibly altered and reshuffled in extreme crises, as it had been in the mediaeval West: its structural location within the social formation was always upheld. Eastern Absolutism, no less than Western, stopped at the gates of the manor itself: conversely, the aristocracy drew its fundamental wealth and power from stable possession of the land, not from temporary sojourn in the State. The great bulk of agrarian property remained juridically hereditary and individual within the noble class, right across Europe. Grades of the nobility could be coordinated with ranks in army and administration, but they were never reduced to them; titles always subsisted outside the service of the State, bespeaking honour rather than office.
It is thus not surprising that the parabola of the relationship between monarchy and aristocracy in the East was, despite the great differences in the whole historical formation of the two halves of Europe, so similar to that in the West. The imperious advent of Absolutism met with initial incomprehension and refusal; then, after confusion and resistance, it was finally accepted and embraced by the landed class. The 18th century was an epoch of reconciliation between monarchy and nobility throughout Europe. In Prussia, Frederick II pursued avowedly aristocratic policies of recruitment and promotion in the Absolutist State apparatus, excluding foreigners and roturiers from positions in the army and civil service which they had once held. In Russia, too, the professional expatriate officers who had been a mainstay of the reformed Tsarist regiments of the late 17th century were phased out, and the dvorianstvo came into its own again in the Imperial armed forces, while its provincial administrative privileges were generously enlarged and confirmed by Catherine II’s formal Charter of the Nobility. In the Austrian Empire, Maria Theresa even succeeded to an unprecedented extent in melting Hungarian hostility to the Habsburg dynasty, tying Magyar magnates to court life in Vienna and creating a special Hungarian Guard for her person in the capital. At mid century, the central power of the monarchies was greater than ever before, and yet the rapport between the respective rulers and landowners of the East was closer and more relaxed than at any time in the past. Moreover, unlike that of the West, the later Absolutism of the East was now in its political apogee. The ‘Enlightened Despotism’ of the 18th century was essentially a Central and East European affair14 – symbolized by the three monarchs who finally partitioned Poland: Frederick II, Catherine II and Joseph II. The chorus of praises for their work from the bourgeois philosophes of the Western Enlightenment, for all their often ironic misconceptions, was not simply a historical accident: dynamic energy and capability seemed to have passed to Berlin, Vienna and St Petersburg. This period was the high point of the development of the Absolutist army, bureaucracy, diplomacy and mercantilist economic policy in the East. The Partition of Poland, calmly and collectively executed in defiance of the impotent Western powers on the eve of the French Revolution, seemed to symbolize its international ascent.
Anxious to shine in the mirror of Western civilization, the Absolutist rulers in Prussia and Russia assiduously emulated the past record of their compeers in France or Spain, and flattered the occidental writers who arrived to report on their splendour.15 In certain limited respects, the Eastern Absolutisms of this century were curiously more advanced than their Western prototypes of the previous century, because of the general evolution of the time. Where Philip III and Louis XIV had heedlessly expelled Moriscos and Huguenots, Frederick II not only welcomed religious refugees but set up immigration bureaux abroad to promote the demographic growth of his kingdom – a new twist to mercantilism. Populationist policies were likewise promoted in Austria and Russia, which launched ambitious colonization programmes in the Banat and the Ukraine. Official toleration and anti-clericalism were enforced in Austria and Prussia, by contrast with Spain or France.16 Public education was inaugurated or expanded, marked progress being achieved in the two Germanic monarchies, particularly in the Habsburg realms. Conscription was introduced everywhere, most successfully in Russia. Economically, Absolutist mercantilism and protectionism were prosecuted with vigour. Catherine presided over a great expansion of the metal industry of the Urals, and accomplished a major reform of the Russian currency. Frederick II and Joseph II both doubled the industrial establishments of their domains; in Austria, traditional mercantilism was even mingled with the more modern influences of physiocracy, with its greater emphasis on agrarian production and the virtues of domestic laissez-faire.
Yet none of these apparent advances actually altered the relative character and position of the Eastern exemplars of European Absolutism in the epoch of the Enlightenment. For the underlying structures  of these monarchies remained archaic and retrograde, even in the hour of their greatest prestige. Austria, shaken by defeat in war with Prussia, was the scene of a royal attempt to restore the strength of the State by emancipating the peasantry:17 Joseph II’s agrarian reforms, however, ended in failure, inevitable once the monarchy became isolated from its circumambient nobility. Austrian Absolutism remained permanently weakened and inferior. The future lay with Prussian and Russian Absolutism. Serfdom was preserved by Frederick II and extended by Catherine II: the manorial foundations of Eastern Absolutism survived intact in the two dominant powers of the region into the next century. Then, once again, it was the shock of military attack from the West, which had once contributed to bring Eastern Absolutism into existence, that finally brought the serfdom on which it had rested to an end. For now the assault came from capitalist States, and could not long be resisted. Napoleon’s victory at Jena led directly to the legal emancipation of the Prussian peasantry in 1811. Alexander II’s defeat in the Crimea precipitated the formal emancipation of the Russian serfs in 1861. Yet in neither case did these reforms mean the end of Absolutism itself, in Eastern Europe. The life-span of the two, contrary to linear expectations, but in conformity with the oblique march of history, did not coincide: the Absolutist State in the East, as we shall see, was to survive the abolition of serfdom.

1. F. Dvornik, The Slavs: Their Early History and Civilization, p. 324; ibidem, The Slavs in European History and Civilization, pp. 121–8.
2. Bloch perceived this, if mistakenly offering a culturalist explanation of it, by asserting that ‘the Slavs never knew’ the distinction between concession for service and outright gift. See his note, ‘Féodalité et Noblesse Polonaises’, Annales, January 1939, pp. 53–4. In fact, concession of land for service was known in Western Russia from the 14th to the 16th centuries, and later emerged in the pomest’e system.
3. Hermann Aubin, ‘The Lands East of the Elbe and German Colonization eastwards’, in The Agrarian Life of the Middle Ages, p. 476.
4. P. Skwarczynski, ‘The Problem of Feudalism in Poland up to the Beginning of the 16th century’, Slavonic and East European Review, 34, 1955–6, pp. 296–9.
5. Skazkin rightly dwells on this point. ‘Osnovnye Problemy tak Nazyvaemovo “Vtorovo Izdaniya Krepostnichestva” v Srednei i Vostochnoi Evrope’, pp. 99–100.
6. There is an excellent delimitation and discussion of the relevant historical pattern in the Russian lands in Vernadsky’s extremely lucid text, ‘Feudalism in Russia’, Speculum, Vol. 14, 1939, pp. 300–23. In the light of the later pomest’e system, it is important to stress that the vassal relationships of the mediaeval period were genuinely contractual and reciprocal, as can be seen from the homages of the time. For an account and examples of this, see Alexandre Eck, Le Moyen Age Russe, pp. 195–212.
7. It should be noted, however, that Prussian Absolutism did not disdain coercion where it deemed it necessary. The Sergeant King banned all foreign travel by junkers except with his express permission, in order to oblige them to take up officer duties in the Army. A. Goodwin, ‘Prussia’, in Goodwin (ed.), The European Nobility in the 18th Century, p. 88.
8. R. A. Dorwart, The Administrative Reforms of Frederick William I of Prussia, Cambridge USA, 1953, p. 226.
9. The Prussian Landtag existed formally down to Jena, but was in practice deprived of any but decorative functions by the 1680’s. In the 18th century, it merely assembled to pay homage to new monarchs at their accession.
10. See the sharp analysis of its record in J. L. H. Keep, ‘The Decline of the Zemsky Sobor’, The Slavonic and East European Review, 36, 1957–8, pp. 100–22.
11. See H. Seton-Watson, The Russian Empire 1801–1917, Oxford 1967, p. 77,
12. The spread of French among the Prussian, Austrian and Russian ruling classes in the 18th century is, of course, evidence of the absence in the Eastern European States of the ‘proto-nationalist’ nimbus acquired by West European Absolutism in an earlier epoch – determined in its turn by the lack of any ascendant bourgeoisie in the Eastern Europe of this era. The Prussian monarchy itself, of course, continued to be avowedly hostile to national ideals down to the eve of German unification: the Austrian to the end of its existence.
13. The most striking demonstration of the strict objective limits to Absolutist power was to be the long-successful resistance of the Russian nobility to Tsarist contemplation of emancipation of the serfs in the 19th century. By then, both Alexander I and Nicholas I – two of the most powerful monarchs Russia had known – personally considered serfdom to be in principle a social fetter, yet in practice ended by actually transferring more peasants into private bondage. Even when emancipation was finally decreed by Alexander II, in the second half of the 19th century, the form of its implementation was largely determined by combative aristocratic counter-moves. For these episodes, see Seton-Watson, The Russian Empire, pp. 77–8, 227–9, 393–7
14. This emerges clearly from the best recent study of the subject, François Bluche’s Le Despotisme Eclairé, Paris 1968. Bluche’s book provides a fine comparative survey of the enlightened despotisms of the 18th century. Its explicative framework, however, is defective, relying essentially on a theory of generative examples, whereby Louis XIV is said to have provided an original model of government, which inspired Frederick II, who himself then inspired his fellow-sovereigns of the time (pp. 344–5). Without denying the importance of the – relatively novel – phenomenon of conscious international imitation between states in the 18th century, the limitations of such a genealogy are obvious enough.
15. Bluche’s commentary on the breathless and gullible admiration of the philosophes for the royal rulers of the East is particularly sardonic and vigorous: Le Despotisme Eclairé, pp. 317–40. Voltaire was the coryphée of Prussian Absolutism in the person of Frederick II, Diderot of Russian Absolutism in that of Catherine II; while Rousseau characteristically reserved his commendation for the Polish squirearchy, whom he advised not to rush intemperately into the abolition of serfdom. The Physiocrats Mercier de la Rivière and De Quesnay vaunted the merits of ‘patrimonial and legal despotism’ generally.
16. Joseph II could declare, in the accents of the age: ‘Toleration is an effect of that beneficent increase of knowledge which now enlightens Europe, and which is owing to philosophy and the efforts of great men; it is a convincing proof of the improvement of the human mind, which has boldly reopened a road through the dominions of superstition, which was trodden centuries ago by Zoroaster and Confucius, and which, fortunately for mankind, has now become the highway of monarchs.’ S. K. Padover, The Revolutionary Emperor, Joseph II 1741–1790 London 1934, p. 206.
17. The first official scheme for the abolition of robot labour services and the distribution of land to the peasantry was drafted in 1764 by the Hofkriegsrat, with the aim of improving recruitment to the army: W. E. Wright, Serf, Seigneur and Sovereign – Agrarian Reform in Eighteenth Century Bohemia, Minneapolis 1966, p. 56. The whole Josephine programme must always be seen against the background of Habsburg military humiliations in the War of the Austrian Succession and the Seven Years’ War.