09 -- Prussia

3
Prussia
Having surveyed their common determinants, we may now briefly consider the divergent evolution of the particular social formations of the East. Prussia presents the classical case in Europe of an uneven and combined development, which eventually produced the largest industrialized capitalist State in the continent from one of the smallest and most backward feudal territories of the Baltic. The theoretical problems posed by this trajectory were specifically raised by Engels, in his famous letter to Bloch in 1890, on the irreducible importance of political, legal and cultural systems in the structure of all historical determination: ‘According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. More than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted. . . . The Prussian State also arose and developed from historical, ultimately economic causes. But it could scarcely be maintained without pedantry that among the many small states of North Germany, Brandenburg was specifically determined by economic necessity to become the great power embodying the economic, linguistic and, after the Reformation, also the religious difference between North and South, and not by other elements as well (above all by its entanglement with Poland, owing to the possession of Prussia, and hence with international political relations – which were indeed also decisive in the formation of the Austrian dynastic power).’1 At the same time, it is evident that the complex causes of Brandenburg’s ascent also contain the answer to the central rebus of modern German history as a whole – why the national unification of Germany in the epoch of the industrial revolution was ultimately achieved under the political aegis of the agrarian junkerdom of Prussia. The rise of the Hohenzollern State, in other words, concentrates in a particularly clear form some of the key general issues of the nature and function of Absolutism in European political development.
Its beginnings were not especially auspicious. The Hohenzollern house was originally transplanted by the Emperor Sigismund, during his struggle with the Hussite Revolution in Bohemia, from South Germany – where it had traditionally been an aristocratic line at loggerheads with the trading city of Nuremburg – to Brandenburg in the early 15th century. Frederick, the first Hohenzollern Margrave of Brandenburg, was made an Elector of the Empire for his services to Sigismund in 1415.2 The next Margrave suppressed the municipal autonomy of Berlin, while his successors prised the other towns of the Mark from the Hanseatic League and subordinated them in turn. By the early 16th century, as we have already seen, Brandenburg was a region voided of free cities. The defeat of the towns, however, ensured the supremacy of the nobility rather than the dynasty in this remote frontier zone. The local aristocracy steadily enlarged its demesnes, enclosing village commons, and deprived small peasants of their land, as export farming became more lucrative. The landowning class simultaneously seized control of higher justice, bought out Electoral domains, and monopolized administrative offices, while a series of ineffectual rulers slipped into increasing debt and impotence. An entrenched Estates system, dominated by the nobility, vetoed the development of a standing army and virtually any foreign policy, making the Electorate one of the most pronounced examples of a decentralized Ständestaat in Reformation Germany. Thus, after the economic crisis of the later Middle Ages, Brandenburg settled down to a modest manorial prosperity, with very weak princely power, during the epoch of the price revolution in the West. Benefiting from the profits of the corn trade, but showing little aggressive political drive, junker society formed a sleepy and provincial backwater throughout the 16th century.3 Meanwhile, East Prussia had become the hereditary fief of another branch of the Hohenzollern family, when Albert Hohenzollern opportunely wound up the Teutonic Order as its last Grand Master by declaring for the Reformation in 1525, and acquiring the secular title of Duke from his Polish overlord. The dissolution of the ruling military-clerical order, long decadent since its defeat and subjugation by Poland in the 15th century, led to the fusion of its knights with lay landowners and hence to the creation of a unified seigneurial class in East Prussia for the first time. A peasant revolt against the new regime was promptly crushed, and a society very similar to that in Brandenburg consolidated. Eviction and enserfment proceeded in the countryside, where free tenants were soon degraded to the ranks of villeins. A small stratum of Cölmer, once petty servitors of the Teutonic Knights, on the other hand survived. Virtually all towns of any importance had been annexed by Poland in the previous century anyway, with the exception of Königsberg – the one relatively large and undaunted city of the region. Constitutionally, princely power in the new Duchy was very limited and fragile, although the ducal lands themselves were extensive. The Prussian Estates, in fact, secured perhaps wider privileges than any other such institutions in Germany, including administrative appointments, judicial powers, and permanent rights of appeal to the Polish monarchy against the Dukes.4 The international significance of East Prussia was now even less than that of Brandenburg.
In 1618, the two principalities – hitherto politically unrelated – were united when the Elector of Brandenburg acceded to the succession in East Prussia by an inter-familial marriage; although the Duchy continued to be a Polish fief. Four years earlier, another geographical gain had been made in the lower Rhineland, when the two small territories of Cleves and Mark, densely populated and highly urbanized enclaves in the West, were gathered by inheritance to the Hohenzollern patrimony. The new dynastic acquisitions of the early 17th century, however, remained without any land-bridge to Brandenburg; the three possessions of the Elector were strategically scattered and vulnerable. The Electorate itself was still by all-German standards an indigent and isolated state – contemptuously termed ‘the sand-box of the Holy Roman Empire’ by its contemporaries. ‘There was nothing to indicate that Brandenburg or Prussia would ever play a major part in German or European affairs.’5 It was the gales of the Thirty Years’ War and of Swedish expansion which were to buffet the Hohenzollern State out of its inertia. Brandenburg was for the first time put on the map of international politics when Wallenstein’s Imperial armies victoriously marched across Germany to the Baltic. The Elector George William, a Lutheran hostile to the prospect of a Calvinist ruler in Prague, had rallied politically to the Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand II over the original conflict in Bohemia; a military role was beyond him since he effectively had no army. His defenseless territory was nevertheless occupied and pillaged by Austrian troops in 1627, while Wallenstein installed himself in Mecklenburg. In East Prussia, meanwhile, Gustavus Adolphus had seized Memel and Pillau – the two forts commanding Königsberg – in pursuit of his war with Poland, and thereafter levied tolls on all maritime traffic into the Duchy. Then, in 1631, the Swedish expeditionary army landed in Pomerania and invaded Brandenburg in its turn. George William, who had helplessly fled to East Prussia, was obliged by Gustavus Adolphus to change sides and declare against the Imperial cause. Four years later, he defected to make a separate peace with the Emperor. But for the duration of the rest of the Thirty Years’ War, Swedish armies were always garrisoned in the Electorate, which was at the mercy of their financial exactions. The Estates were naturally brushed aside by the occupying power. Brandenburg ended the long conflict as passively as it had begun it. Paradoxically, however, it gained at the Treaty of Westphalia. For in the course of the war, Pomerania had legally reverted to the Hohenzollern line on the death of its last Duke. The Swedish conquest of Pomerania – the main Baltic base for Nordic operations in the Lower Saxon Circle – had prevented this inheritance from taking any effect during the war, but at French insistence the poorer Eastern half of the province was now grudgingly relinquished to Brandenburg, which was also compensated with smaller gains to the south and west of the Electorate. The Hohenzollern State emerged externally from the Thirty Years’ War with little political or military credit, yet territorially enlarged by the peace. Internally, its traditional institutions had been deeply shaken, but no new ones had arisen to succeed them.
The new and young Elector, Frederick William I, who had been educated in Holland, came into his patrimony under normal conditions for the first time with the conclusion of the peace. Two indelible lessons had been learnt by the experience of the decades of foreign occupation: the urgent need to build an army capable of withstanding Swedish imperial expansion in the Baltic and – complementarily – the administrative example of coercive Swedish tax-collection in Brandenburg and East Prussia, in defiance of the protests of the local Estates. The immediate preoccupation of the Elector was thus to secure a stable financial basis with which to create a permanent military apparatus for the defense and integration of his realms. Vasa forces, in fact, did not evacuate Eastern Pomerania until 1654. Hence in 1652, the Elector summoned a general Landtag in Brandenburg, convoking the whole nobility and all the towns of the Mark to it, for the purpose of instituting a new financial system to provide for a princely army. Protracted wrangling with the Estates ensued, finally ending the following year with the famous Recess of 1653, which consecrated the beginnings of the social pact between the Elector and the aristocracy which was to provide the lasting foundation of Prussian Absolutism. The Estates refused to grant a general excise tax, but voted a subsidy of half a million thalers over six years for the establishment of an army, which was to become the nucleus of the future bureaucratic State. In exchange, the Elector decreed that henceforward all peasants in Brandenburg were assumed to be Leibeigene serfs unless proved otherwise; seigneurial jurisdictions were confirmed; noble estates were closed against commoner purchase; and aristocratic fiscal immunity was preserved.6 Within two years of this deal being reached, war had broken out again in the Baltic, with the lightning Swedish attack on Poland in 1655. Frederick William opted for the Swedish side in this conflict, and in 1656 his fledgling army entered Warsaw side by side with Charles X’s troops. Polish military recovery, backed by Russian and Austrian intervention, soon weakened the Swedish position, which was also attacked in the rear by Denmark. Brandenburg thereupon deftly switched sides, in exchange for formal Polish renunciation of its overlordship of East Prussia. The Treaty of Labiau in 1657 for the first time established unconditional Hohenzollern sovereignty over the Duchy. The Elector then rapidly occupied Western Pomerania with a mixed Polish, Austrian and Brandenburger force. The Treaty of Oliva in 1660, however, returned this province to Sweden with the restoration of peace, at French insistence.
The Baltic War of 1656–60, meanwhile, had abruptly and drastically altered the domestic balance of forces within the Hohenzollern possessions. In Brandenburg, East Prussia and Cleves-Mark, the Elector had overriden all constitutional niceties in the name of military emergency, collecting taxes without the consent of the local assemblies, and building up a troop force of some 22,000, which was halved but not disbanded with the cessation of hostilities. A more drastic reckoning with Estates particularism was now possible. East Prussia, where the nobility had hitherto been accustomed to lean back against Polish suzerainty to resist Hohenzollern pretensions, and the towns had been openly malcontent during the war, was the first domain to experience the new power of the Electorate. In 1661–3, a long Landtag was summoned. The refusal of the burghers of Königsberg to accept full dynastic sovereignty in the Duchy was broken by the summary arrest of the ringleader of urban resistance, and an excise tax was wrested for the maintenance of the army. The Elector had to promise to hold tri-annual sessions of the Estates and not to levy taxes henceforward without its consent: but these concessions were to prove largely formal. In Cleves-Mark, meanwhile, the Estates had been pressured into acceptance of the ruler’s right to introduce troops and appoint officials at will.
In 1672, the Franco-Dutch War drew the Hohenzollern State – a diplomatic ally and financial client of the United Provinces – into renewed military conflict, this time on a European scale. By 1674, the Elector was titular commander of the combined German forces operating against France in the Palatinate and Alsace. In the next year, Sweden invaded Brandenburg as a French ally, in his absence. Hastening home, Frederick William struck back at the battle of Fehrbellin in 1675, when for the first time Brandenburg troops overcame Scandinavian veterans, in the marsh-lands north-west of Berlin. By 1678, the whole of Swedish Pomerania had been overrun by the Elector. But once again French intervention robbed him of his conquests: Bourbon armies marched into Cleves-Mark and menaced Minden, the Hohenzollern outposts in the West, and France was able to dictate the restoration of Western Pomerania to Sweden in 1679. Geographically fruitless, the war was nevertheless institutionally profitable for the construction of a princely Absolutism. East Prussia was forcibly subjected to a land-tax and excise collection without representative consent, to the mutterings of noble dissidence and the louder menaces of burgher revolt. Königsberg was the centre of resistance: in 1674, a swift military coup seized the city, and smashed its municipal autonomy permanently. Thereafter, the Prussian Estates docilely voted the large contribution demanded of them for the duration of the war.7
The conclusion of peace brought no respite in the growing concentration of power in the hands of the Elector. In 1680, an urban excise tax was made obligatory in Brandenburg, which was deliberately not extended to the countryside in order to divide the nobility from the towns. A year later, the same fiscal separatism was introduced in East Prussia, and by the end of the Elector’s reign, it had been extended to Pomerania, Magdeburg and Minden. Rural charges were paid by the peasantry alone in Brandenburg and Cleves-Mark; in East Prussia the nobility made a slight contribution, but the bulk of the burden was born by their tenants. The administrative division of town and countryside created by this dualism split the potential social opposition to nascent Absolutism irremediably. Taxes were effectively confined to towns and peasants, in a proportion of 3:2. The new fiscal load was particularly damaging to the cities, because the freedom from excise enjoyed by breweries and other enterprises on their estates allowed landowners to compete with impunity against urban manufactures. The economic strength of the towns of Brandenburg and East Prussia, already hard hit by the general depression of the 17th century, was thus further reduced by State policy: and once the excise became a permanent consumption tax, the cities were effectively deleted from further Landtag representation. The nobility, by contrast, received velvet treatment financially and legally. Not only were its traditional privileges confirmed in the major Eastern provinces: in the Western enclaves of Cleves and Mark, the Elector even conferred de novo seigneurial jurisdictions and fiscal immunity on the local aristocracy, where it had never possessed these before.8 The wintry economic climate of the later 17th century provided another incentive for the landowning class to rally to the political edifice of princely power that was now going up in the Hohenzollern realms: the prospects of employment within it were a further inducement to abandon the crabbed ways of earlier tradition.
For while the Estates system had been steadily ground down, the military-bureaucratic apparatus of centralist Absolutism was being rapidly and relentlessly elevated. A Privy Council for the Mark of Brandenburg had existed since 1604, but it had soon been colonized by local noblemen, becoming an unimportant and parochial body whose activity virtually lapsed altogether during the Thirty Years’ War. Frederick William revived it after Westphalia, when it started intermittently to assume central direction of the Hohenzollern domains as a whole, while remaining localist in underlying outlook and primitive in administrative function. During the war of 1665–70, however, a specialist department for the conduct of military affairs throughout the dynastic lands was created, the Generalkriegskommissariau. With the resumption of peace, this Commissariat was reduced in role and personnel, but not abolished: it remained under the formal supervision of the Privy Council. Thus far, the evolution of Brandenburger Absolutism followed an administrative path very similar to that of earlier Western monarchies. The onset of the war of 1672–8 marked an abrupt and decisive departure from it. For the Generalkriegskommissariat now started to commandeer virtually the whole machinery of the State itself. In 1674 a Generalkriegskasse was formed, which within a decade had become the central Hohenzollern treasury, as tax-collection was increasingly entrusted to the officials of the Commissariat. In 1679, the Generalkriegskommissariat acquired a professional soldier at its head, the Pomeranian aristocrat Von Grumbkow; its ranks were expanded; a regular bureaucratic hierarchy was created within it; and its responsibilities diversified outwards. In the course of the next decade, it organized the settlement of Huguenot refugees and handled immigration policy, controlled the guild system in the towns, supervised trade and manufactures, and launched the naval and colonial enterprises of the State. The Generalkriegskommissar himself was now in practice at once Chief of the General Staff, Minister for War and Minister for Finance. The Privy Council was dwarfed by this huge growth. The officialdom of the Commissariat was recruited on a unitary, inter-provincial basis, and was used as the major bludgeon of the dynasty against local particularism or resistant assemblies.9 The Generalkriegskommissariat was not, however, in any sense a weapon against the aristocracy itself. On the contrary, its top echelons were staffed with leading nobles, both at central and provincial levels: commoners were concentrated in the comparatively lowly department for urban tax-collection.
The prime function of the whole tentacular apparatus of the Commissariat, of course, was to ensure the maintenance and expansion of the armed forces of the Hohenzollern State. To this end, total revenues were tripled from 1640 to 1688, a per capita fiscal yield nearly twice as high as that of Louis XIV’s France, a vastly richer country. At Frederick William’s accession, Brandenburg possessed a mere 4,000 troops; by the end of the reign of the ruler whom contemporaries now called the ‘Great Elector’, a permanent army of 30,000 well-trained soldiers existed, led by an officer corps recruited from the junker class and imbued with martial loyalty towards the dynasty.10 The death of the Great Elector revealed how well his work was jointed. His vain and inconsequential successor Frederick committed the Hohenzollern house to the European coalition against France from 1688 onwards. Brandenburger contingents acquitted themselves competently in the Wars of the League of Augsburg and the Spanish Succession, while the reigning prince ran through foreign subsidies by his extravagance at home and failed to secure any territorial gains for his international policy. The only prominent achievement of the reign was the acquisition for the dynasty of the royal title of King of Prussia – diplomatically conceded in 1701 by the Emperor Charles VI in exchange for a formal Habsburg-Hohenzollern alliance, and legally covered by the fact that East Prussia lay outside the boundaries of the Reich, in which no kingships were permitted beneath the Imperial dignity itself. The Prussian monarchy, however, still remained a small and backward state perched on the edges of North-Eastern Germany. The total population of the Hohenzollern lands had been a mere 1,000,000 in the last years of the Great Elector – some 270,000 in Brandenburg, 400,000 in East Prussia, 150,000 in Cleves-Mark and perhaps another 180,000 in the smaller domains. By the death of Frederick I in 1713, the Prussian realm still contained no more than 1,600,000 inhabitants.
This modest legacy was to be remarkably nurtured by the new monarch, Frederick William I. The ‘Sergeant King’ devoted his career to building up the Prussian Army, which doubled in size from 40,000 to 80,000 under a ruler who was symbolically the first European prince permanently to wear uniform. Military drill and training were royal obsessions; ordnance works and cloth factories for supplying the field were tirelessly promoted; conscription was introduced; a cadet college for young noblemen was founded, and officer service in foreign armies was rigorously banned; the war commissariat was reorganized under Von Grumbkow’s son. The use of the new troops was extremely prudent: Western Pomerania was finally taken from Sweden in 1719, when Prussia joined Russia and Denmark against Charles XII in the closing stages of the Great Northern War. Otherwise, the army was cautiously husbanded behind a pacific diplomacy. The bureaucracy was meanwhile streamlined and rationalized. The State apparatus had hitherto been divided into the ‘domain’ and ‘commissariat’ columns – i.e. the private and public financial agenciesof the monarchy, responsible respectively for administration of the royal estates and collection of civic taxes. These were now merged into one central pillar, memorably designated the General-Ober-Finanz-Kriegs-und-Domänen-Direktorium, with responsibility for all administrative duties outside foreign affairs, justice and the church. A corps of secret police or special ‘fiscals’, was created to exercise surveillance over the civil service.11 The economy was no less carefully tended. Dikes, drainage and settlement projects were financed in the countryside, using Dutch skills and technicians. French and German immigrants were recruited for local manufactories under State control. Royal mercantilism promoted textiles and other exports. At the same time, court expenses were held to a frugal minimum. The result was that the Sergeant King commanded an annual income of 7 million thaler by the end of his reign, and left a surplus of 8 million thaler in the exchequer for his successor. Perhaps even more important, the population of his realm had increased to some 2,250,000 – or nearly 40 per cent within less than three decades.12 Prussia in 1740 had quietly accumulated the social and material preconditions which were to make it a major European power under the generalship of Frederick II, and ultimately to assure its leadership of German unification.
The question can now be asked: what was the total political configuration of Germany that made the later dominance of Prussia within it possible and logical? Vice-versa, what specific traits distinguished Hohenzollern Absolutism from the rival territorial States within the Holy Roman Empire with an equally plausible claim to German ascendancy in the early modern epoch? At the outset, a single basic line of division can be drawn through the Reich, separating its Western from its Eastern regions. Western Germany was by and large thickly sprinkled with towns. From the High Middle Ages onwards, the Rhineland was one of the most flourishing commercial zones in Europe, lying across the trade-routes between the two urban civilizations of Flanders and Italy, and profiting from the longest natural waterway used in the continent. In the Centre and North, the Hanseatic League dominated the North Sea and Baltic economies, stretching from Westphalia all the way across to the colonial outposts of Riga and Reval in Livonia and up to Stockholm and Bergen in Scandinavia, while also enjoying privileged positions in Bruges and London. In the South-West, the Swabian cities benefited from transalpine trade, and from the exceptional mining resources of their hinterland. The specific weight of these numerous towns had never been great enough to create city-states of the Italian type, with extensive agrarian territories subject to them; those which did come to possess a modest rural circumference, like Nuremberg, were the exception rather than the rule. For their size was on average considerably smaller than the Italian cities. By 1500, out of some 3,000 German towns, only 15 had populations larger than 10,000, and 2 larger than 30,000:13 Augsburg, the biggest, numbered some 50,000 at a time when Venice or Milan were over 100,000. On the other hand, their strength and vitality had secured them in the Middle Ages the position of free imperial cities, subject only to the nominal suzerainty of the Emperor (there were 85 of these), and they had shown a political capacity for collective action on a regional scale which alarmed the territorial princes of the Empire. In 1254, the Rhenish towns had formed a defensive military League; in 1358, the Hansa towns completed their economic federation; in 1376, the Swabian towns created an armed association against the Count of Württemberg. The Golden Bull of the mid-14th century officially banned urban leagues, but this did not prevent the Rhenish and Swabian cities from signing a united South German pact in 1381, which was finally crushed by an army of princes seven years later, during the depths of the late feudal depression and concomitant anarchy in the Reich. The economic growth of the Teutonic towns, however, picked up rapidly again in the latter half of the 15th century, and reached its apogee in the period 1480–1530, when Germany became something like the diversified centre of the whole European trading system. The Hanseatic League was essentially a mercantile association, without much manufacturing enterprise in the cities themselves: its profits came from entrepôt trade in grain, and control of herring fisheries, combined with international financial transactions. The Rhineland, with the oldest towns in Germany, had traditional linen, woollen and metal industries besides its control of the commercial routes from Flanders to Lombardy. The prosperity of the Swabian cities was newest, and most flourishing of all: textiles, mining and metallurgy gave them an advanced productive base, to which were added the banking fortunes of the Fuggers and Welsers in the epoch of Charles V. At the turn of the 16th century, the South German cities surpassed, if anything, their Italian counterparts in technical invention and industrial progress. It was they who spearheaded the first, popular advance of the Reformation.
The growth of the urban economy in Germany, however, suddenly tailed off at mid-century. Adversity took a number of inter-related forms. To start with, there was a slow reversal of the relationship between agrarian and industrial prices, as demand outpaced supply in foodstuffs, and cereal prices rose rapidly. Lack of structural integration became increasingly apparent in the German commercial network itself. The Northern and Southern ends of the long arc of towns running from the Alps to the North Sea had never been properly linked together in an articulated system.14 The Hanseatic League and the Rheno-Swabian cities always constituted separate mercantile sectors, with distinct hinterlands and markets. Maritime trade proper, the ace-card of medieval commerce, was confined to the Hansa, which had once dominated the seas from England to Russia. But from the mid-15th century onwards, the competitive shipping of Holland and Zeeland – better designed and equipped – had broken the monopolistic grip of the Hanseatic ports in Northern waters. Dutch herring-fleets captured the fisheries, which had migrated from the Baltic to the Norwegian coasts, while Dutch cargoes cut into the Danzig grain trade. By 1500, Dutch vessels moving through the Sound outnumbered German by 5:4. Hanseatic wealth had thus already passed its peak during the period of maximum German commercial expansion as a whole. The League still remained rich and powerful: in the 1520’s, as we have seen, Lübeck was instrumental in installing Gustavus Vasa in Sweden and bringing down Christian II in Denmark. The very large absolute increase in Baltic traffic during the 16th century to some extent compensated for the precipitate decline of its relative share of it. But the League lost its vantage-points in Flanders, was deprived of its privileges in England (1556), and by the end of the century was reduced to a mere quarter of the volume of Dutch shipping through the Sound.15 Increasingly divided between its Westphalian and Wendish wings, it was a spent force. Meanwhile, the Rhenish towns were likewise victims, in a different way, of Dutch dynamism. For the Revolt of the Netherlands had led to the closure of the Scheldt in 1585, after the Spanish conquest of Antwerp – the traditional terminus for downstream traffic; and to tight control by the United Provinces over the Rhine estuaries themselves. The great expansion of Netherlands naval and manufacturing power in the later 16th and early 17th centuries thus progressively compressed or thwarted the Rhenish economy upstream from it, since Dutch capital commanded its outlets to the sea. The oldest cities of the Rhineland consequently tended to shrink into a routine conservatism, their archaic guild-systems stifling any adjustment to new circumstances: Cologne, the most illustrious, was one of the few large German cities to remain a bastion of traditional Catholicism throughout the century. New industries in the region tended to settle in smaller and more rural localities, free of corporative restrictions.
The South-Western towns, on the other hand, had a stronger manufacturing foundation and their well-being survived longer. But with the enormous expansion of international overseas trade from the epoch of the Discoveries onwards, their inland position became a critical economic handicap; while compensation along the Danube was blocked by the Turks. The spectacular operations of the Augsburg banking houses in the Habsburg imperial system, financing Charles V and Philip II in successive military adventures, brought their own retribution. The Fuggers and the Welsers were in the end ruined by their loans to the dynasty. Paradoxically, the Italian cities – whose relative decline had started earlier – actually ended the 16th century more prosperous than the German towns, whose future had seemed better assured at the time of the Sack of Rome by an army of Landsknechten. The Mediterranean economy had resisted the effects of the rise of Atlantic trade longer than that of landlocked Swabia. Naturally, the contraction of urban centres in Germany in this epoch was not uniform. Isolated cities – notably Hamburg, Frankfurt and to a lesser extent Leipzig – made rapid gains and first achieved major economic importance in the period 1500–1600. Western Germany still remained by the standards of the time a generally wealthy and urbanized zone in the early 17th century, although it had ceased to register substantial growth. The comparative density of towns thus marked out a complicated political pattern similar to that of Northern Italy. For here too, just because of the power and plurality of mercantile cities, there was no expanding space for aristocratic absolutism. The social environment of the whole zone was rebarbative to major princely states, and no territorial monarchy of any importance ever emerged there. The predominant nobility necessary for one was lacking. Yet at the same time, the towns of the Rhineland or Swabia themselves, despite their number, were weaker than those of Tuscany or Lombardy. They had as a rule never possessed a rural contado of the Italian type in the mediaeval period, and in the early modern epoch they proved incapable of evolving into city-states proper, comparable to the lordships of Milan and Florence or the oligarchies of Venice and Genoa.16 The political relationship of the seigneurial class to the towns was consequently quite distinct in Western Germany. Instead of a simplification of the map into a few medium-sized urban states ruled by neo-aristocratic adventurers or patricians, there was a multiplicity of small free cities amidst a maze of dwarfish princedoms.
The petty territorial states of Western Germany were distinguished, in particular, by a prominent contingent of ecclesiastical principalities. Of the four Western Electors of the Empire, three were Archbishoprics – Cologne, Mainz and Trier. These curious constitutional fossils dated from the early feudal epoch, when the Saxon and Swabian Emperors had used the Church apparatus in Germany as one of its major instruments of regional rule. Whereas in Italy episcopal rule was early overthrown in the Northern cities, where the main danger to the communes became the political designs of successive Emperors and their main ally against these the Papacy, in Germany the Emperors by contrast had generally sponsored both municipal autonomy and episcopal authority, against the pretensions of secular barons and princes in collusion with Papal intrigues. The result was that both petty ecclesiastical States and free cities survived into the early modern epoch. In the countryside, agrarian property nearly everywhere took the form of the Grundherrschaft, in which free peasant tenants paid dues in kind or cash for their holdings to feudal landlords who were frequently absentee owners. In South-Western Germany, large numbers of smaller nobles had successfully resisted absorption into territorial principalities by acquiring the status of ‘imperial knights’ owing unmediated allegiance to the Emperor himself rather than homage to any ascendant local lord. By the 16th century, there were some 2,500 of these Reichsritter, whose total landed possessions amounted to no more than some 250 square miles. Many of them, of course, became embittered or reckless mercenaries; but many other families interpenetrated with the peculiar politico-ecclesiastical complexes that were dotted throughout Western Germany, occupying offices and prebends in them17 – two anachronistic social forms mutually perpetuating each other. In this littered landscape, there was no room for the growth of a substantial or conventional Absolutist State, even on a regional scale. The two most significant secular principalities in the West were the Rhine Palatinate and the Duchy of Württemberg. Both contained many imperial knights and small cities, neither a serious territorial nobility. Württemberg, with 400–500,000 inhabitants, never played a major role in German politics as a whole, or looked as if it might do so. The Palatinate, which supplied the fourth Western Elector in the Empire, and controlled the tolls of the middle Rhine, was a richer and more considerable State, whose rulers achieved a comparatively early absolutist authority in the 16th century.18 But its one attempt at major expansion – Frederick V’s fatal bid for Bohemia in the early 17th century, which triggered the Thirty Years’ War – brought lasting disaster on it: few areas of Germany were so put to the torch by contending armies in the European military conflict which ensued. The later 17th and early 18th centuries brought little respite for recovery. Both the Palatinate and Württemberg were in the front line of Louis XIV’s wars, from 1672 to 1714, and were savagely devastated by French and Imperial troops alike. The strategic vulnerability of these two Western principalities compounded their territorial limitations. By the mid-18th century, they were merely the small change of international diplomacy, of no political weight within Germany itself.
The historical terrain presented by Western Germany as a whole thus proved incompatible with the emergence of any major Absolutism. The same sociological necessity which determined this absence in the West ensured that all the important experiences of Absolutist State-construction, which showed a real possibility of establishing an ultimate hegemony within the Empire, came from the East. Excluding for the moment the Habsburg lands in Austria and Bohemia, which will be considered later, the future chances of German unity basically lay with the three Eastern States which formed a tier from the Tyrol to the Baltic – Bavaria, Saxony and Brandenburg. From the 16th century onwards, these were the only real contenders for the leadership of a nationally unified Germany, apart from the House of Austria. For it was in the more recently colonized and more backward East, where cities were much fewer and weaker, that a strong machinery of Absolutism – unfettered by urban proliferation and upheld by a powerful nobility – was alone possible. To see why it was the northernmost of these three States which won final ascendancy in Germany, it is necessary to look at the internal structure of each. Bavaria was much the oldest, a major unit of the Carolingian Empire and one of the great stem duchies of the 10th century. In the late 12th century, the Wittelsbach house became lords of Bavaria. No other line ever supplanted it thereafter: the Wittelsbach dynasty was to achieve the longest unbroken record of rule over its hereditary region of any reigning family in Europe (1180–1918). Its possessions were frequently subdivided during the Middle Ages, but by 1505 were reunited once again by Albert IV into a single and powerful Duchy, some three times larger than the Mark of Brandenburg. During the religious upheavals of the 16th century, the Bavarian Dukes opted without hesitation for the Catholic cause, and made their realm the most solid bulwark of the Counter-Reformation in Germany. Their brisk suppression of Lutheranism was accompanied by firm subordination of the local Estates, the main focus of Protestant resistance in the Duchy. Dynastic control was achieved over the Archbishopric of Cologne, which remained an important family connection to the Rhineland for nearly two centuries after 1583. The Wittelsbach rulers who were responsible for this religious and political programme, also introduced the first bureaucratic appurtenances of absolutism into Bavaria: a Financial Chamber, a Privy Council and a War Council modelled on Austrian lines, were all established by the 1580’s.
Administrative influences from Austria did not, however, mean that Bavaria was in any sense a Habsburg satellite in this epoch. In fact, the Bavarian Counter-Reformation was well ahead of the Austrian, and supplied both example and personnel for the recatholicization of the Habsburg lands: the future Emperor Ferdinand II himself was a product of Jesuit training at Ingolstadt, at a time when Protestantism was still the dominant faith of the landed classes in Bohemia and Austria. In 1597, Maximilian I acceded to the Ducal title and soon proved himself the most resolute and capable ruler in Germany. Summoning a submissive Landtag only twice before the Thirty Years’ War, he concentrated all judicial, financial, political and diplomatic powers in his person, doubling taxes and accumulating 2 million guilders’ reserves for a war chest. Thus when the Thirty Years’ War broke out, Bavaria was the natural leader of the Catholic states of Germany against the threat of a Calvinist take-over in Bohemia. Maximilian I recruited and equipped an army of 24,000 for the Catholic League, which played a vital role in the victory of the White Mountain in 1620, and then attacked and conquered the Palatinate in the following year. Throughout the long vicissitudes of the ensuing military struggle, the Duke taxed his realm ferociously, with complete disregard for the protests of the Estates committee against the price of his war effort: by 1648, Bavaria had paid no less than 70 per cent of the total costs incurred by the armies of the Catholic League during the Thirty Years’ War, which had meanwhile devastated the local economy and decimated the population, leading to an acute depression in the Duchy.19 Maximilian nervertheless emerged from Westphalia the strongest autocrat in Germany, practising an Absolutism more uninhibited and unyielding than that of Frederick William in Brandenburg after him. Bavaria had been enlarged by the annexation of the Upper Palatinate, and had acquired the Electoral dignity. It seemed the most powerful ethnically German State in the Empire.
The future, however, was to belie this appearance. Bavarian Absolutism was early consummated: but it rested on very limited and inelastic foundations. The social structure of the Duchy, in fact, did not permit any further major expansion, checking the Wittelsbach State short of an ascendant all-German role. The Bavarian social formation, unlike that of Württemberg or the Palatinate, contained few free cities or imperial knights. Much less urbanized than these western principalities, its towns were nearly all diminutive in size: Munich, the capital city, had only 12,000 inhabitants in 1500 and less than 14,000 in 1700. The local aristocracy were traditional landowners, who owed direct allegiance to ducal authority. It was this social configuration, of course, which rendered possible the rapid emergence of an Absolutist State in Bavaria, and its subsequent stability and longevity. On the other hand, the nature of Bavarian rural society was not propitious to any dynamic enlargement of the realm. For if the nobility was numerous, its estates were also small and scattered. The peasantry beneath it formed a free tenantry, owing relatively light dues to its landlords: labour services never acquired real importance, amounting to no more than 4–6 days a year in the 16th century. Nor did the nobility enjoy higher justice over their labour force. There was little consolidation of aristocratic demesnes, partly perhaps because of the lack of export outlets for cereals, given Bavaria’s geographical position deep in the Central European land-mass, without river routes to the sea. The most notable feature of the Grundherrschaft agriculture in South-Eastern Germany was the economic protuberance of the Church, which owned no less than 56 per cent of all peasant farms by the mid-18th century, compared with a mere 24 per cent controlled by the aristocracy and 13 per cent by the dynasty.20 The relative weakness of the noble class revealed by this property pattern was reflected in its juridical position. It did not achieve full fiscal immunity, although it was naturally taxed much less than any other estate: and its efforts to prevent any non-noble acquisition of its domains, formally embodied in a law banning such purchases in the last Landtag of the 17th century, was effectively sabotaged by covert clerical operations in the land market. Moreover, the acute labour shortage caused by the depopulation of the Thirty Years’ War redounded to the disadvantage of the Bavarian aristocracy, given its prior lack of juridical purchase over the villages. It meant that in practice the peasantry was able to bargain successfully for alleviation of dues and amelioration of leases, while many noble properties fell into mortgage. This social background imposed narrow political limits to the potential of Bavarian Absolutism, which soon became evident. The same pattern – ‘small noble estates, small towns and small peasants’21 – which offered very little resistance to the emergence of a ducal Absolutism, also infused it with very little impetus.
The Duchy ended the Thirty Years’ War with a population equivalent to that controlled by the Hohenzollern Elector in the north – some 1,000,000 subjects. Maximilian I’s successor, Ferdinand Maria, strengthened the civil apparatus of Wittelsbach rule, establishing the supremacy of the Privy Council and using the all-purpose Rentmeister as the key official for local administrative intendancy; the last Landtag was dismissed in 1669, although a ‘permanent committee’ of it survived somewhat ineffectually into the next century. But while the Great Elector was steadily building up a permanent army in Brandenburg, Bavarian troops were disbanded after Westphalia. It was not until 1679 that the new Duke, Max Emmanuel, reconstituted a Wittelsbach military force. But even then, it was never able to attract the Bavarian nobility as a whole into its service: local aristocrats were a small minority of the officer corps in what anyway remained a very modest army (some 14,000 in the mid-18th century). Max Emmanuel, an ambitious and carefree general who had won his spurs against the Turks in the relief of Vienna, became Regent of the Spanish Netherlands by marriage in 1672 and a candidate for the Hispanic inheritance itself at the turn of the 18th century. Gambling for the highest stakes, he threw in his lot with Louis XIV in 1702, at the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession. The Franco-Bavarian alliance briefly dominated the field in Southern Germany, threatening Vienna itself: but Blenheim shattered its chances of victory in Central Europe. Bavaria was occupied by Austrian troops for the rest of the conflict, while Max Emmanuel – stripped of his rank and put under the ban of the Empire – fled to Belgium. The attempt to use French power to establish Wittelsbach ascendancy in Germany had failed disastrously. At the Peace of Utrecht, the Duke had so little confidence in the prospects of his Bavarian patrimony that he proposed to Austria to swap it for the Southern Netherlands – a scheme vetoed by England and France, which was to reappear again at a later date. The dynasty returned to a land enfeebled by a decade of pillage and destruction. Post-war Bavaria gradually sank into a semi-comatose condition of introversion and corruption. The extravagance of the court in Munich absorbed a higher proportion of the budget than in perhaps any other German State of the time. State debts steadily increased as tax-farmers dissipated public revenues, the rural populace remained blighted with religious superstition, the nobles more inclined to ecclesiastical prebends than military duties.22 The size of the Duchy, and the preservation of a small army, ensured Bavaria’s diplomatic importance within the Empire. But by 1740, it was no longer a convincing candidate for the political leadership of Germany.
Saxony, the next realm to the north, represented a somewhat different version of Absolutist development in the Eastern tier of German States. The local ruling house, the Wettin dynasty, originally acquired the Duchy and Electorate of Saxony in 1425, a few years after the Hohenzollern line had obtained the Mark of Brandenburg, and in much the same way – as a grant by the Emperor Sigismund for military services rendered in the wars against the Hussites, in which Frederick of Meissen, the first Wettin Elector, had been one of his chief lieutenants. Partitioned between Ernestine and Albertine branches of the family in 1485, with capitals respectively at Wittenberg and Dresden-Leipzig, the Saxon lands nonetheless remained the wealthiest and most advanced region of Eastern Germany. They owed their preeminence to the rich silver and tin mines of the mountains, and textile industries which developed in the towns. The commercial cross-roads of Leipzig, as we have seen, was one of the few German cities to grow uninterruptedly throughout the 16th century. The relatively high degree of urbanization in Saxony, by contrast with Bavaria or Brandenburg, and the regalian rights of the local princes in the mining industry, produced a social and political pattern distinct from that of its southern or northern neighbour. There was no manorial reaction in the late mediaeval or early modern epoch comparable to that of Prussia: the power of the Saxon nobility was not great enough to reduce the peasantry to serfdom, given the weight of the towns in the social formation. Seigneurial demesnes were larger than in Bavaria, partly because clerical lands were much less significant. But the basic trend in the countryside was towards free tenant farming, with commutation of labour services for cash rents – in other words, the milder regime of the Grundherrschaft. The aristocracy did not achieve complete fiscal immunity (its allodial possessions were subject to tax), and was unable to secure the legal closure of noble property to commoner purchase. It was well represented in the Estates system, however, which became increasingly stable and influential in the course of the 16th century. On the other hand, the towns were also vigorously present in the Landtage, although they had to bear the brunt of the excise on alcohol which provided a staple of princely revenues, to the advantage of the nobility; urban representatives were also excluded from the Obersteuercollegium which from the 1570’s administered tax-collection in the Electorate.
The Wettin dynasty was able, in this socio-economic context, to amass wealth and force without any direct attack on the Estates or considerable development of bureaucratic government. It had never relinquished higher judicial prerogatives, and controlled a large independent income from its mining rights – which supplied some two-thirds of Albertine cameral revenue in the 1530’s, while the prosperity of the region permitted both profitable and tolerable consumption taxes from an early date.23 It is thus not surprising that Saxony became the first princely State to dominate the German arena politically, in the epoch of the Reformation. The Ernestine Electorate was the religious cradle of Lutheranism from 1517 onwards: but it was the Albertine Duchy, which did not go over to the Protestant camp until 1539, that commanded the centre of the political stage in the complex drama that followed the outbreak of the Reformation in Germany. For Maurice of Saxony, who succeeded to the Duchy in 1541, rapidly outmanoeuvred all rival princes and the Emperor himself, in the pursuit of dynastic advantage and territorial aggrandizement. Joining in the Imperial attack on the Schmalkaldic League with Charles V, he participated in the annihilation of the Protestant armies at Mühlberg, and so acquired the bulk of the Ernestine lands and the Electoral title. Orchestrating the Franco-Lutheran attack on Charles V five years later, he destroyed Habsburg chances of reconverting Germany and clinched the unification of Saxony under his rule. At his death, the new Saxon State was the most powerful and prosperous principality in Germany. Fifty years of peaceful growth, during which the Estates were regularly summoned and taxes were steadily increased in the Electorate, ensued.
The onset of the Thirty Years’ War, however, caught Saxony militarily and diplomatically unprepared in the early 17th century. While Bavaria played a star role among the German States in the conflict, Saxony was reduced to a hesitant weakness very similar to that of Brandenburg. Both the Wettin and Hohenzollern Electors, although Protestant, sided with the Habsburg imperial camp in the initial stages of the war; both were subsequently occupied and devastated by Sweden, and forced over to the anti-Habsburg bloc; both then defected for a separate peace with the Emperor. Saxony acquired Lusatia by the Treaty of Westphalia, and its princes a regular war-tax which was used to create a modest permanent army. The wealth of the country allowed it to recover comparatively quickly from the effects of the Thirty Years’ War. Direct taxation rose some 5 to 6 times between 1660 and 1690. The military apparatus of the Wettin State had increased in size to some 20,000 men by the end of the century, when it performed adequately, together with analogous Bavarian contingents, against the Turks in the relief of Vienna. In 1700, Saxony still had an edge on Brandenburg as an East German power. Its army was some- what smaller, and its Estates system had not been quashed. But it contained perhaps twice the population, was much more industrially developed, and possessed a proportionately larger treasury. The early 18th century, in fact, now witnessed the major Saxon bid for political primacy within the German State system. For in 1697, the Elector Frederick Augustus I adopted Catholicism in order to win Austrian backing for his candidature to the Polish monarchy. This exercise proved successful. The Elector became the first German ruler to achieve a royal title as Augustus II, and obtained a political lien on nearby Poland, separated from Saxony only by the slender length of Silesia. At the same time, a general sales tax was successfully imposed in Saxony, against the resistance of the Estates: significantly, however, the Saxon excise – unlike the Brandenburger – was extended from the towns into the countryside, at the cost of the nobility.24 The army was now raised to 30,000, nearer to its counterpart in Brandenburg.
The Saxon-Polish Union, however, was no sooner achieved than the last great drive of Swedish imperialism shattered it. Charles XII marched into Poland, expelled Augustus II from the country, and then invaded Saxony itself in 1706, crushing the Wettin army and imposing a ruthless occupation on the Duchy. The Russian victory over Sweden in the Ukraine eventually repaired the Saxon position internationally, at the end of the Great Northern War. The Polish dignity was restored to Augustus II; the army was built up again in the 1730’s; the Estates were increasingly flouted. But the outward show of the Wettin State, displayed in the baroque elegance of its capital in Dresden, no longer corresponded to its inner strength. The Polish connection was a decorative lure, which brought more expense than gain, because of the Active character of the szlachta monarchy: the Saxon investiture had been accepted precisely because Russia and Austria calculated that the Wettin house was too slight to be a dangerous rival. The war which it had occasioned had wrought great damage to the economy of the Duchy. Moreover, unlike the Sergeant King in Berlin, Augustus II was notorious for the extravagance of his court, in addition to his military ambitions. These combined burdens critically weakened Saxony in the years when Prussia was accumulating assets for the contest within Germany ahead. The population of Saxony, 2,000,000 in 1700, had sunk to 1,700,000 or so in the 1720’s, while that of Prussia had increased from about 1,000,000 in 1688 to 2,250,000 in 1740: the relative demographic values of each had been reversed.25 The Saxon nobility had shown little ardour for the adventures of the Elector abroad, and was losing ground at home in the land market to burghers as the century progressed. The Estates survived, partly because of the Polish distractions of the dynasty, and within them the importance of the towns if anything grew. The bureaucratic machinery of the State remained unimpressive, less developed than that of Bavaria. In the absence of any auditing discipline, princely finances became waterlogged with debts. The result was that Saxon Absolutism, despite its promising start and the autocratic propensities of successive Wettin rulers, never achieved real firmness or consistency: the social formation was too fluid and mixed in character.
It is now possible to see why Brandenburg was to be picked out so singularly for dominance in Germany. There was a progressive elimination of alternatives. The Absolutist State was everywhere in Europe fundamentally a political apparatus of aristocratic rule: the social power of the nobility was the central spring of its existence. Within the fragmented arena of the post-mediaeval Reich, only those regions which possessed an economically strong and stable landowning class were likely ever to achieve a diplomatic or military leadership of Germany: for they alone could generate an Absolutism capable of equalizing with the greater European monarchies. Western Germany was thus cancelled out from the start, because of the density of its urban civilization. Bavaria possessed no towns of any undue importance, and did develop an early Absolutism under the sign of the Counter-Reformation: but its nobility was too weak, its clergy too endowed, its peasantry too free, to found a dynamic princedom. Saxony contained a more spacious aristocracy, but its cities were also much stronger, and its peasantry no more servile. By 1740, both States had passed their peak. In Prussia, by contrast, the junker class maintained an iron serfdom on its estates, and a vigilant tutelage over the towns: seigneurial power achieved its purest expression in the Hohenzollern lands, the remotest outposts of German settlement in the East. It was thus not the external frontage of Prussia onto Poland that determined its ascent within Germany, as Engels thought.26 In fact, as we have seen, entanglement with Poland (Engels’s word) was actually one of the precipitates of the decline of Saxony; the later Prussian role in the Polish partitions was merely the epilogue to the decisive military victories it had already won within Germany itself, and did little to strengthen it internationally. It was the internal nature of the Prussian social formation which explains its sudden overshadowing of all other German States in the epoch of the Enlightenment, and ultimate presidency over the unification of Germany. This rise was overdetermined by the complex historical totality of the Reich as a whole, which prevented the emergence of a Western-type Absolutism in the Rhineland, fragmented the territory of the Empire into some 2,000 political units, and extruded the House of Austria towards its non-Germanic borderlands. The key external force affecting the respective fates of Prussia and Austria within Germany was not Poland, but Sweden. For it was Swedish power which destroyed the chance of a Habsburg unification of the Empire in the Thirty Years’ War, and Swedish proximity which was the main foreign threat acting as a centripetal pressure on the construction of the Hohenzollern State – whose compulsion Bavaria and Saxony, the other East German principalities, never experienced to the same extent, although Saxony did not escape from becoming the final victim of Nordic militarism. The capacity of Prussia to resist Swedish expansion, and to outfight every rival within Germany, must in turn be related to the peculiar cast of the junker class itself, with the consolidation on a transparently class basis of a dynastic Absolutism by the Great Elector and Sergeant King.
To start with, the scale of the country itself, in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, left its stamp on the Prussian aristocracy. The combined Hohenzollern lands in the East – Brandenburg, East Prussia and later West Pomerania – were still small in size and very thinly settled. Their total population in 1740 was below 2,000,000 if the Western enclaves of the dynasty were excluded; the relative density of habitation was probably less than half that of Saxony. One of the most constant motifs of State policy from the Great Elector onwards was to be the quest for immigrants to colonize this underpopulated region. The Protestant character of Prussia was to prove a critical asset in this respect. Refugees from Southern Germany after the Thirty Years’ War and Huguenots after the Edict of Nantes were eagerly planted in the early years: Dutch, German and more French under Frederick II. But it must always be borne in mind that Prussia remained an extremely modest country, down to the conquest of Silesia, by comparison with the general run of European monarchies at the time. This provincial scale reinforced certain notable traits of the junker class. For above all, the Prussian aristocracy was peculiar among major European nobilities in that it did not have a very wide spectrum of fortunes within it: we shall see that the Polish szlachta, similar in many other ways, were in this respect its polar opposite. Thus the average Rittergüter – the feudal commercial farms of the Prussian nobility – were of medium size. There was no stratum of great magnates, with huge latifundia far larger than the properties of the smaller gentry, such as was to be found in most other European countries.27 The old Herrenstand of the higher nobility had lost its dominance to the mass of the Ritterschaft by the mid-16th century.28 The one really big landed proprietor was the monarchy itself: the royal demesnes accounted for one-third of the arable land in the 18th century.29 Two important consequences followed for the character of the junker class. On the one hand, it was socially less divided than many other European aristocracies: it formed, on the whole, a cohesive bloc of like-minded middling landowners, without undue regional divergences. On the other, it meant that the average junker tended to exercise a direct function in the organization of production, when not engaged in service duties. In other words, he was very often the real, and not merely nominal, manager of his estates. (The residence pattern of the Prussian nobility naturally encouraged this tendency, since towns were few and far between.) The phenomenon of great absentee landowners, with devolution of administrative functions on the demesne to bailiffs and stewards, was uncommon. If relative equality of wealth distinguished the junkers from their Polish opposites, careful husbandry of the demesne separated them from the Russian nobility. The discipline of the export market doubtless contributed to more rational management of the Gutherrschaft. The Prussian junkers of the late 17th and early 18th century were thus a compact social class, in a small country, with rough rural business traditions. Thus when the Great Elector and Frederick William I were building their new Absolutist State, the distinctive prior patterns of the nobility produced a sui generis administrative structure.
For unlike virtually every other Absolutism, the Prussian model was able to make productive use of the traditional representative institutions of the aristocracy, once their central node had been dissolved. The provincial estates or Landtage did, as we have seen, progressively lapse after the 1650’s; the last real session of the Brandenburg Landtag in 1683 was largely devoted to lamenting the omnipotence of the Generalkriegskommissariat. But the local ‘county’ estates or Kreistage became the basic bureaucratic unit in the countryside. From 1702 onwards, these junker councils elected candidates from the local nobility to the post of Landrat, from whom one was then formally appointed to the office by the monarchy. The institution of the Landrat, who was vested with all administrative, fiscal and military powers in the rural districts, to some extent recalls the Justice of the Peace in England, in its savant compromise between the autonomous self-administration of the gentry and the unitary authority of the central State. However, the resemblance is a misleading one, since the partition of spheres in Prussia was founded on a bedrock of servile labour. Serfdom could technically take two forms in Prussia. Leibeigenschaft was the hereditary personal subjection of peasants, with no civil or property rights whatever, who could be sold apart from the land. Erbuntertänigkeit was the condition of hereditary estate dependence, with some minimal legal rights, but bondage to the demesne and obligatory services to the lord both in house and field. In practice there was little distinction between the two. The State thus exercised no direct jurisdiction at all over the mass of the rural population, who were governed by the junkers in their Gutsbezirke under the supervision of the Landrat, and whose taxes – two-fifths of peasant income30 – were collected directly by their lords. The towns, on the other hand, and the royal demesne itself, were ruled by a professional bureaucracy, which was the direct arm of Absolutism. A painstaking toll and traffic control system regulated movements of persons and goods from one sector to another of this dual administration.
The military caste itself, as we have seen, was overwhelmingly co-opted from the nobility: in 1739, all 34 Generals, 56 out of 57 Colonels, 44 out of 46 Lieutenant-Colonels, and 106 out of 108 Majors, were aristocrats.31 The higher civil bureaucracy was also extensively and increasingly recruited from the junker class. The Sergeant King was careful to balance nobles with burghers in its provincial chambers, but his son deliberately promoted aristocrats at the expense of middle-class functionaries. Rigorously collegial principles governed the organization of this civil service, whose basic cell was the ‘board’ of co-responsible officials, not the individual functionary – a system well designed to inculcate impersonal collective duty and probity, in a Lutheran nobility.32 The remarkable discipline and efficacy of these institutions was a reflection of the unity of the class which staffed them. There were no grandee rivalries with clientages inside the State apparatus; there was minimal venality of office because of the nullity of the towns; there was not even tax farming until Frederick II (who imported a Régie from France), because the squires were themselves entrusted with collection of fiscal exactions from their peasants in the countryside, and the urban excise was controlled by professional Steuerräte, while the royal demesne provided a large cameral income of its own. The Prussian junkers were so firmly in command of State and society in the 18th century that they felt no need for the vinculism of their Western counterparts: Frederick II tried to promote the primogenitural maiorat to consolidate aristocratic estates, but his ideological zeal found little response from the landowners, who even preserved ancient feudal rules of collective agnate consent for family loans.33 They were not threatened by an ascendant bourgeoisie gradually prising open the land market, and so felt little need to protect their social position by disinheriting their cadet children: junker estates were habitually divided on the death of their owners (which in turn helped to keep down their size). Free from intra-noble tensions, paramount over the towns, lords of their peasants, the Prussian landowning class was more stolidly at one with its State than any other in Europe. Bureaucratic unity and rural autonomy were uniquely reconciled in this cabbage paradise. Junker Absolutism, built on these foundations, contained a formidable potential for expansion.
In 1740, Frederick William I and the Emperor Charles VI both died. The Prussian heir, Frederick II, immediately fell upon Silesia. This rich Habsburg province was rapidly occupied by the Hohenzollern army. France seized the opportunity to secure Prussian support for a Bavarian candidate to the Imperial dignity. In 1741 the Wittelsbach Duke Charles Albert was elected Emperor, and Franco-Bavarian troops marched into Bohemia. Prussian war aims did not include the resurrection of Bavarian primacy in South Germany, or the domination of France in the Empire. Frederick II, having defeated Austria in the field, therefore made a separate peace with Vienna in 1742, leaving Prussia in possession of Silesia. Habsburg military recovery in the struggle against France, and the alignment of Saxony with Austria, precipitated his re-entry into the war two years later, to protect his gains. Saxony was defeated and ransacked: Austrian armies were successfully held off, after very hard fighting. In 1745, the international conflict was concluded, with the restoration of the Imperial title and the Bohemian kingdom to the Habsburg heiress, Maria Theresa, and the confirmation of the Hohenzollern conquest of Silesia. The victories of Frederick II in the War of the Austrian Succession, long prepared by the work of his predecessors, were the strategic turning-point in the European career of Prussian Absolutism, making it for the first time a triumphant power in Germany. Berlin, in fact, had scored simultaneously against Munich, Dresden and Vienna. The last Bavarian chance of political expansion had been foiled; the Saxon armies had been routed; and the Austrian Empire had been deprived of its most industrialized province in Central Europe, containing the commercial hub of Breslau. Conversely, the acquisition of Silesia increased the population of Prussia by 50 per cent at one blow, bringing it up to some 4 million inhabitants, and endowing it for the first time with a relatively advanced economic region in the East, with a long tradition of urban manufactures (textiles). The feudal order in Prussia as a whole was not seriously modified by this extension, however: the mass of the rural population of Silesia, no less than that of Brandenburg, were Erbuntertänigen. The local nobility merely owned larger estates. The annexation of Silesia was, in fact, in relative terms perhaps the most important and lucrative single addition to any European continental State in the epoch.34
It was the magnitude of Prussian success in 1740–5, the swift and decisive shift in the balance of power which it portended, which explains the extraordinary scale of the coalition woven against it by the Austrian Chancellor Kaunitz in the succeeding decade. Revenge was to be on a scale fitting the enormity of the upset: by 1757, Kaunitz’s ‘diplomatic revolution’ had united Austria, Russia, France, Sweden, Saxony and Denmark against Prussia. The combined population of these powers was at least twenty times that of the intended victim of their alliance: the aim of the coalition was nothing less than to erase the Prussian State from the map of Europe. Surrounded from all sides, Frederick II in desperation struck first, formally inaugurating the Seven Years’ War with the invasion of Saxony. The bitter struggle that ensued was the first truly all-European war, in which every major power from Russia to England and Spain to Sweden was simultaneously involved, since the continental conflict interlocked with the maritime and colonial conflict between Britain and France. The Prussian military apparatus commanded by Frederick II, now comprising an army of some 150,000 troops, survived shattering setbacks and defeats, to emerge with a final, thin margin of victories against all its enemies. The diversionary campaigns financed by England in Westphalia, drawing off French forces, and the eventual defection of Russia from the coalition, were critical factors in the ‘miracle’ of the House of Brandenburg. But the real secret of Prussian resilience was the burnished efficacy of its Absolutism: the State structure that had been scheduled for rapid and complete destruction by Kaunitz proved far more capable of withstanding the enormous economic and logistic strains of the war than the rambling empires arrayed against it in the East. No territory changed hands at the peace in 1763. Silesia remained a Hohenzollern province and Vienna ended the war in more parlous financial condition than Berlin. The repulse of the grand attack by Austria was to prove a conclusive defeat for Habsburg arms in Germany, as subsequent events were to show: its deeper consequences only became apparent later. Saxony, repeatedly and relentlessly plundered by Frederick II, had to bear half the entire Prussian war costs; it now sank into political insignificance past recall, losing its Polish medallion a few months after the peace. Prussia, although it had achieved no geographical gains and won no decisive campaigns, was strategically stronger within the balance of Germany after the Seven Years’ War than before it.
The purposes of Frederick II’s foreign policy, meanwhile, were complemented by the work of his domestic rule. The top ranks of the bureaucracy and army were consciously aristocratized by the monarchy. The judiciary was reformed by Von Cocceji, and venality largely eliminated from the legal system.35 The economy was fostered by official programmes for both agriculture and industry. Rural drainage, land settlement and transport improvements were organized. State manufactures were founded, shipping and mining promoted, and textile industries developed. The first systematic ‘populationist’ policies in Europe were pursued, with immigrant recruitment centres abroad.36 Frederick II was also responsible for one audacious innovation of Prussian Absolutism, destined to have far-reaching consequences in the next century, if largely a paper measure when first decreed: the institution of compulsory primary education for the whole male population, with the Generallandschulreglement of 1763. On the other hand, gestures to protect the peasantry from landlord oppression and eviction were largely motivated by fears of depleting the able-bodied manpower for the army, and proved uniformly ineffectual. Mortgage banks to help straitened landowners, although suspiciously received by the junker class at the outset, were destined to have greater importance. Public finances, scrupulously controlled and purged of virtually any court expenses, increased remarkably despite the wars of the reign. Annual royal revenues trebled from 7 million to 23 million thalers (1740–86), while reserves quintupled from 10 to 54 million.37 The overwhelming bulk of State expenditure went, of course, on the Army, which rose from 80,000 to 200,000 troops under Frederick II – the highest ratio to population of any country in Europe; the proportion of foreign regiments – hired or empressed abroad – was deliberately maximized to spare the limited productive population at home. The partition of Poland in 1772, in agreement with Russia and Austria, added West Prussia and the Ermland to the Hohenzollern domains in the East, consolidating them into a single territorial bloc and increasing the demographic potential of the State. The total population of Prussia had doubled from 2.5 to 5.4 million towards the end of the reign.38 Internationally, the military reputation of Prussian Absolutism after the Seven Years’ War was by now so formidable that Frederick II could effectively dictate the outcome of the two main crises within Germany of the next decades without having to resort to a serious passage of arms. In 1778–9 and again in 1784–5, Austria tried to recoup its position within Germany by achieving an exchange of the Southern Netherlands for Bavaria, twice reaching an understanding with the Wittelsbach Elector to this end. The merger of Bavaria with Austria would have transformed German history, making the Habsburg dynasty unassailably strong in the South and redirecting the whole political orientation of Vienna centrally back into the Reich. On both occasions, Prussian interdiction sufficed to kill the project. On the first, some token skirmishes in Bohemia were enough. On the second, the diplomatic alignment by Berlin of Hanover, Saxony, Mainz and other principalities in a common bloc against Austria was an adequate veto: the ‘Association of Princes’ collected by Frederick II in 1785, a year before his death, advertised and sealed the Hohenzollern preponderance in Northern Germany.
Four years later, the French Revolution broke out and the viability of every ancien régime in Europe, no matter how politically new, was thrown into question, as different historical times crossed on the battlefields of revolutionary war. Prussia, performing poorly in the first counter-revolutionary coalition against France in the West, seized the opportunity to divide the rest of Poland with Russia and Austria in the East, and then promptly pulled out of the struggle with the Republic in 1795. The day of reckoning was only postponed by Hohenzollern neutrality during the next decade of European war. In 1806, Napoleon’s attack put the Prussian Absolutist State to its supreme test. Its armies were crushed at Jena, and it had to sign a peace treaty at Tilsit which reduced it to satellite status. All its territory west of the Elbe was confiscated, French garrisons were planted in its fortresses, and huge indemnities were imposed on it. This was the crisis that produced the ‘Era of Reforms’. In this, its moment of greatest peril and weakness, the Prussian State was able to draw on a remarkable reserve of political, military and cultural talent to save its existence and renovate its structure. Many of these gifted reformers were in fact from the West and Centre of Germany, socially much more advanced regions than Prussia itself. Stein, the political leader of the come-back against Napoleon, was an imperial knight from the Rhineland. Gneisenau and Scharnhorst, the architects of the new Army, were respectively from Hanover and Saxony. Fichte, the philosophical ideologue of the ‘war of liberation’ against the French, was a resident of Hamburg. Hardenberg, the noble most responsible for the final shape of the Reforms, was a Hanoverian.39 The mixed provenance of the reformers was premonitory. Prussian Absolutism was henceforward to undergo new leases of life, and deep shifts in character, from the basic fact of its cultural and territorial contiguity with the rest of Germany. From the appearance of Napoleon at the gates of Berlin, there was no longer any possibility of the Hohenzollern State developing en vase close. For the moment, however, the reforming impulse did not reach very far. Stein, a Francophobe emigré influenced by Montesquieu and Burke, introduced plans for civic equality, agrarian reform, local self-government and nationalist mobilization against Napoleon. In his year of office (1807–8), he did away with the now cumbersome Generaldirektorium and instituted a conventional Ministerial system with functional departments modelled on the lines of the French monarchy, while special officials were dispatched from the capital to supervise provincial affairs. The result was in practice an enhanced centralization of the whole State apparatus, only nominally offset by the grant of limited municipal autonomy to the towns. In the countryside, serfdom was formally abolished and the three-estates juridical system abrogated. These policies encountered vehement opposition among the junker class for their ‘radicalism’, and when Stein started to move against the patrimonial jurisdictions and fiscal immunity of the nobility, and to plan a general armed levée against France, he was promptly ejected.
His successor Hardenberg, a court politician, then applied a skilful dose of legislation exactly measured to modernize Prussian Absolutism, and the class which it represented, to the extent necessary to reinvigorate them, without affecting the essential nature of the feudal State. Agrarian ‘reform’ was implemented from 1810 to 1816 in such a way as to intensify rural misery still further. In exchange for legal emancipation, the peasants suffered economic despoliation of some 1,000,000 hectares and 260,000,000 marks in ‘compensation’ to their former masters for their new liberty.40 The so-called Bauernlegen was a cold instrument for the expropriation of the peasantry. Communal lands and the three-field system were swept away. The result was to enlarge the manorial estates and create a growing mass of landless agricultural labourers, kept at the disposal of the junkers by strict legal ordinances. Hardenberg simultaneously widened access to landownership for the bourgeoisie (who could now purchase estates) and to the professions for the nobility (who no longer dropped rank by taking up law or business). The vitality and versatility of the junker class was thereby increased, without any serious loss of privileges. An attempt to end the role of the Landrat was speedily scuttled by the aristocracy, and the traditional county assemblies remained unreformed. In fact, noble control of the countryside was actually augmented by the extension of Landrat authority to rural towns. Seigneurial dues persisted long after the abolition of serfdom. The exemption of the Rittergut from land taxes lasted until 1861; manorial police jurisdiction until 1871; junker monopoly of county administration until 1891. In the cities, Hardenberg abolished guild monopolies, but was unable to end fiscal dualism; while Humboldt drastically extended and modernized the public educational system, from the elementary Volksschule to the foundation of the new University of Berlin. Meanwhile, Scharnhorst and Gneisenau organized a reserve system to evade the post-Tilsit provisions limiting the size of the Prussian army establishment, ‘popularizing’ recruitment but also thereby increasing the institutional militarization of the whole social order. Field regulations and tactical training were updated. Command functions were rendered formally open to bourgeois recruits, but officers could veto new admissions to their regiments – ensuring that junker control was not endangered.41 The net effect of the Reform Era was to strengthen rather than moderate the royal state in Prussia. Significantly, however, it was in this period that the junker class – the most loyal nobility in Europe during the difficult growth of Absolutism in the 17th and 18th centuries, the only such class never to resort to civil strife against the monarchy – now for the first time became vocally restive. The Reformers’ threat to its privileges, even though soon retracted, stirred up ideological opposition of a consciously neo-feudal character. Von Marwitz, the leader of Brandenburger dissidence against Hardenberg, revealingly denounced both absolutism and parliamentarism in the name of the long-forgotten Estates constitution prior to the advent of the Great Elector. Henceforward, there always existed a choleric junker conservatism in Prussia, a mood curiously displaced from the 17th to the 19th century, that was often to be at odds with the monarchy.
The sum of the Reforms allowed Prussia to participate competently in the final coalition which defeated Napoleonic France. Yet it was essentially a traditional ancien regime which attended the Congress of Vienna, in company with its neighbours Austria and Russia. Although the Prussian Reformers were disliked as near ‘Jacobins’ by Metternich, the Hohenzollern State was still in certain respects less socially advanced than the Habsburg Empire after the Josephine Reforms of the late 18th century. The real turning-point in the history of Prussian Absolutism is to be dated, not from the work of the Reforms, but from the gains it made at the Peace. To prevent it obtaining Saxony, and to compensate it for Russian absorption of most of Poland, the Allies awarded it Rhine-Westphalia at the other end of Germany – much against the will of the court in Berlin. With this act, they shifted the whole historical axis of the Prussian State. Designed by Austria and Britain to check its territorial consolidation in East-Central Germany, the Rhenish provinces were separated from Brandenburg by Hanover and Hesse, leaving the Hohenzollern domains strategically straggled across Northern Germany, and assigned hazardous defense duties against France in the West. The actual consequences of the settlement were expected by none of the parties to it. The new Hohenzollern possessions contained a population larger than that of all the old provinces put together – 5,500,000 in the West to 5,000,000 in the East. At one stroke, the demographic weight of Prussia doubled to more than 10,000,000: Bavaria, the next largest German state, had only 3,700,000.42 Moreover, Rhine-Westphalia was one of the most advanced regions of Western Germany. The peasantry still paid customary dues and the landowners enjoyed special hunting and other rights; but small-holder agriculture was deeply entrenched and the noble class were generally absentee landlords, not their own estate managers as in Prussia. Rural Amt assemblies included peasant representation, unlike the junker Kreistage. Social relations in the countryside were thus much milder in pattern. The new provinces contained in addition a large number of flourishing towns, with long traditions of municipal autonomy, commercial exchange and manufacturing activities. Much more important even than this, of course, was the fact that because of its mineral resources – as yet unexploited – the region was destined to become the most colossal industrial zone in Europe. The military acquisitions of the feudal Prussian State thus came to incorporate the natural heartland of German capitalism.
The development of the new composite State into a unified Germany in the course of the 19th century forms in essence part of the cycle of bourgeois revolutions, which will be considered elsewhere. It will be enough here to stress three crucial aspects of the socio-economic evolution of Prussia which rendered possible the later success of the Bismarckian programme. Firstly, within the East itself, Harden-berg’s agrarian reform of 1816 led to a rapid and imposing advance of the whole corn economy. By freeing the land market, the reform progressively sieved out incapable and endebted junkers from the countryside. Correspondingly, the number of bourgeois investors in land increased, a stratum of prosperous peasant farmers or Grossbauern emerged, and there was a marked rationalization of agrarian management: by 1855, 45 per cent of the Rittergüter in the six Eastern provinces had non-aristocratic owners.43 At the same time, those junkers who were left on the land were now proprietors of larger and more productive estates, aggrandized both by purchase from fellow nobles and by eviction of peasants from commons and small-holdings. In the 1880’s, 70 per cent of the largest agrarian properties (over 1,000 hectares) were owned by nobles.44 The whole agricultural sector entered a phase of expansion and prosperity. Crop yields and sown acreage rose together: in fact, both of them doubled in Ostelbian Prussia from 1815 to 1864.45 The new latifundia were now tilled by wage-labourers, and becoming increasingly orthodox capitalist enterprises. This wage-labour, however, was itself regulated by a feudal Gesindeordnung which survived into the 20th century, and imposed a ruthless manorial discipline on agricultural labourers and domestic servants, with imprisonment for striking and strict limits to mobility. The Bauernlegen had not meant an exodus from the countryside: it had produced a large rural proletariat, whose numbers now rose as output increased, helping to keep wages low. The junker aristocracy thus achieved a successful cumulative conversion to capitalist agriculture, while still exploiting every patrimonial privilege it could keep. ‘The nobles easily made the transition from manorial to capitalistic agriculture, while large numbers of the peasantry were permitted to drown in the cleansing waters of economic freedom.’46
Meanwhile, the Prussian bureaucracy was performing a fundamental service in bridging the Eastern agrarian economy with the industrial revolution simultaneously getting under way in the Western provinces. In the early 19th century, the civil service – which had always provided an occupational refuge for the underdeveloped middle class of the traditional Hohenzollern domains, although it had never dominated its top ranks – was responsible for the gradual establishment of the Zollverein uniting most of Germany with Prussia in a single trading zone. Von Motz and Maassen, of the Finance Ministry, were the two architects of this system, built up from 1818 to 1836, which effectively excluded Austria from German economic development and bound the smaller states commercially to Prussia.47 The surge of railway construction from the 1830’s onwards in turn stimulated rapid economic growth within the Customs Union. Bureaucratic initiatives were also of some importance in providing technological and financial aids to nascent Prussian industry (Beuth, Rother). In the 1850’s, the Zollverein was extended to most of the remaining Northern principalities; Austrian intrusion into it was later deftly blocked by Delbrück, in the Commerce Ministry. The low-tariff policies steadily pursued by the Prussian civil service, culminating in the Treaty of Paris with France in 1864, were a critical weapon in the diplomatic and political competition between Berlin and Vienna within Germany: Austria could not afford the economic liberalization which drew the South German States, dependent on international trade, to the side of Prussia.48
At the same time, however, the fundamental course of German unification was being set by the tempestuous industrial growth of the Ruhr, within the Western provinces of Prussia itself. The Rhenish bourgeoisie whose fortunes were founded on the new manufacturing and mining economy in the West were a much more politically ambitious and outspoken group than the obedient Ostelbian townsmen. It was their spokesmen – Mevissen, Camphausen, Hansemann and others – who organized and led German liberalism and fought for the granting of a bourgeois constitution with a responsible assembly in Prussia during this period. Their programme meant, in fact, the end of Hohenzollern Absolutism, and naturally aroused the obdurate hostility of the junker ruling class in the East. The popular upheavals of 1848, whose mass combustion was furnished by artisans and peasants, briefly gave this liberal bourgeoisie ministerial office in Berlin, and an ideological platform in Frankfurt, before the royal army crushed the revolution a few months later. The Prussian Constitution which was the aborted product of the crisis of 1848, established a national Landtag for the first time, with one chamber based on a three-class electoral system candidly ensuring the dominance of large property, and another recruited overwhelmingly from the hereditary nobility – both without any powers over the executive: an assembly so pale that only some 30 per cent of eligible voters on average participated in the elections to it.49 The Rhenish capitalist class thus remained oppositional even when it won majorities to this token institution. The Ostelbian junkers vigilantly eyed the monarchy for any signs of weakness, actually getting its manorial police powers – abolished in a moment of panic by Frederick William IV in 1848 – restored in 1856. The ‘constitutional conflict’ between the Liberals and the State in the 1860’s thus appeared to be a frontal clash for political power between old and new orders.
Nevertheless, the economic bases of a rapproachement between the two classes were being laid by the steady capitalization of Eastern agriculture during the corn boom, and the vertical increase in the weight of heavy industry within the Prussian social formation as a whole. By 1865, Prussia contained nine-tenths of coal and iron production, two-thirds of steam-engines, half of textile output and two-thirds of industrial labour in Germany.50 The mechanization of German industry had already overtaken that of France. The former extreme reactionary Bismarck, once the truculent champion of ultra-legitimism, was the first political representative of the nobility to see that this burgeoning force could be accommodated in the structure of the State, and that under the aegis of the two possessing classes of the Hohenzollern realm – Prussian junkerdom and Rhenish capital – the unification of Germany was possible. The triumph of the Prussian Army over Austria in 1866 suddenly quieted the discord between the two. Bismarck’s bargain with the National Liberals, which produced the North German Constitution of 1867, sealed a momentous social pact, virtually against the political grain of both the parties to it. Three years later, the Franco-Prussian War completed with éclat the work of national unity. The Prussian Kingdom was merged into a German Empire. The fundamental structure of the new State was unmistakably capitalist. The Constitution of Imperial Germany in the 1870’s included a representative assembly elected by universal male suffrage; a secret ballot; civic equality; a uniform legal code; a single monetary system; secular education; and complete internal free trade. The German State thus created was by no means a ‘pure’ example of its type (none such existed in the world at the time).51 It was heavily marked by the feudal nature of the Prussian State which preceded it. Indeed, in a literal and visible way, the combined development which defined the conjuncture, was embodied in the architecture of the new State. For the Prussian Constitution was not abrogated; it survived inside the Imperial Constitution, since Prussia was now one of the federal units of the Empire, complete with its disenfranchising ‘three-class’ electoral system. The officer corps of its army, which naturally composed the overwhelming bulk of the Imperial military apparatus, was not responsible to the Chancellor, but swore fealty directly to the Emperor, who controlled it personally through his military household.52 The senior ranks of its bureaucracy, purged and reorganized by Von Puttkamer, became if anything more of an aristocratic sanctuary than ever in the decades after 1870. Moreover, the Imperial Chancellor was not responsible to the Reichstag, and could rely on permanent revenues from customs and excise beyond parliamentary control; although budgets had to be approved and laws passed by the Reichstag. Certain lesser fiscal and administrative rights were left in the control of the various federal units of the Empire, formally limiting the unitarianism of the Constitution.
These anomalies lent the German State in the late 19th century a disconcerting cast. Marx’s own characterization of the Bismarckian State reveal a mixture of vexation and bafflement. In a celebrated, enraged phrase that Luxemburg was fond of quoting, he described it as nichts anderes als ein mit parliamentärischen Formen verbrämter, mit feudalem Beisatz vermischter, schon von der Bourgeoisie beeinflusster, bürokratisch gezimmerter, polizeilich gehüteter Militärdespotismus – ‘nothing but a military despotism, embellished with parliamentary forms, alloyed with a feudal admixture, already influenced by the bourgeoisie, furnished by the bureaucracy and protected by the police’.53 The agglutination of epithets indicates his conceptual difficulty, without providing a solution to it. Engels saw much more clearly than Marx that the German State, despite its peculiarities, had now joined the ranks of its English and French rivals. He wrote of the Austro-Prussian War and its author: ‘Bismarck understood the German civil war of 1866 to be what it really was, namely a revolution . . . and he was prepared to carry it through by revolutionary means.’54 The historical result of the conflict with Austria was that ‘the very victories of the Prussian army shifted the entire basis of the Prussian State structure’, so that ‘the social foundations of the old State underwent a complete transformation’.55 Comparing Bismarckism with Bonapartism, he stated roundly that the Constitution created by the Prussian Chancellor was ‘a modern form of state which presupposes the abolition of feudalism’.56 In other words, the German State was now a capitalist apparatus, over-determined by its feudal ancestry, but fundamentally homologous with a social formation which by the early 20th century was massively dominated by the capitalist mode of production: Imperial Germany was soon the largest industrial power in Europe. Prussian Absolutism had thus after many vicissitudes been transmuted into another type of State. Geographically and socially, socially because geographically, it had slowly been tugged over from East to West. The theoretical conditions of possibility of this ‘transmutation’ remain to be established: they will be considered elsewhere.

1. Marx-Engels, Selected Correspondence, p. 417. Althusser has selected this passage as a touchstone in his famous essay, ‘Contradiction and Overdetermination’, For Marx, London 1969, pp. 111–12: but he limits himself to demonstrating the general theoretical importance of Engels’s formulations here, without proposing any solution to the actual historical problems raised by it. Engels’s express emphasis on the complex and overdetermined character of Prussia’s ascent is all the more remarkable when compared with Marx’s comments on the same subject. For Marx precisely did reduce the emergence of the Hohenzollern State in Brandenburg to a virtual caricature of merely economic necessity. In his 1856 article, ‘Das göttliche Recht der Hohenzollern’ (Werke, Bd 12, pp. 95–101), he attributed the rise of the dynasty simply to – a squalid series of bribes: ‘The Hohenzollerns acquired Brandenburg, Prussia and the royal title merely through bribery’. His private correspondence with Engels at the same date uses the same phraseology: ‘Petty thieving, bribery, direct purchase, underhand dealings to capture inheritances, and so on – all this shabby business is what the history of Prussia amounts to.’ (Selected Correspondence, p. 96). This vulgar materialism with a vengeance is a reminder of the dangers of assuming any general superiority of Marx over Engels in the historical field proper: the balance of insight between the two was perhaps if anything usually the opposite.
2. For the context of this move, see Barraclough, The Origins of Germany, p. 358.
3. Hans Rosenberg, ‘The Rise of the Junkers in Brandenburg-Prussia 1410–1653’, American Historical Review, October 1943, pp. 1–22, and January 1944, pp. 228–42.
4. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 168–9.
5. Ibid., p. 174.
6. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 185–9.
7. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 219–21.
8. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 236–9, 246–9.
9. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 259–65.
10. Carsten, The Origins of Prussia, pp. 266–71.
11. For an account of the structure and operation of the Generaloberdirektorium, see R. A. Dorwart, The Administrative Reforms of Frederick William I of Prussia, pp. 170–9. Within the administration, the ‘fiscals’ were not salaried, but paid commissions on fines from successful prosecutions initiated by their investigations.
12. H. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany 1648–1840, London 1965, pp. 192–202.
13. H. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany. The Reformation, London 1965, p. 38.
14. This has often been emphasized by Marxists: see inter alia Lukäcs’s representative essay, ‘Uber einige Eigentümlichkeiten der geschichtlichen Entwicklung Deutschlands’, Die Zerstörung der Vernunft, Neuwied/Berlin 1962, p. 38.
15. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany. The Reformation, pp. 81–2.
16. Brecht’s comments on the civic mentality of the free cities of Germany in general, and on his native Augsburg in particular, as reported by Benjamin, were scathing: Walter Benjamin, Understanding Brecht, London 1973, p. 119. They form a curious counterpoint to Gramsci’s disabused reflections on the Italian cities of the same epoch. For Brecht admired the Renaissance towns of Italy, while Gramsci lauded the urban Reformation in Germany: each sought historical virtue in the national vice of the other.
17. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany. The Reformation, pp. 31, 38.
18. For social conditions in Wūrttemberg and the Palatinate, see F. L. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, Oxford 1959, pp. 2–4, 341–7.
19. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, pp. 392–406.
20. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, pp. 350–2.
21. Ibid., p. 352.
22. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany 1648–1840, pp. 292–3.
23. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, pp. 191–6, 201–4.
24. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, pp. 245–6.
25. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, pp. 250–1.
26. See above, p. 236. Weber seems to have shared a similar belief. See his comment that ‘enemy attacks on the marches’ of mediaeval Germany were responsible for the fact that ‘their governors were everywhere endowed with strong powers’. He concluded: ‘It is for this reason that in Germany the strongest development towards a unified territorial state occurred in Brandenburg and Austria.’ Economy and Society, III, p. 1051.
27. Thus the average value of a sample of 100 estates in the wealthiest region of Brandenburg was no more than 60,000 thalers – perhaps £15,000 – in the 18th century: Walter Dorn, ‘The Prussian Bureaucracy in the Eighteenth Century’, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 47, 1932, No. 2, p. 263. Partly because of the lack of a primogenitural tradition, many of even the largest holdings were encumbered with debts.
28. It still dominated the committees of the Landtag in this epoch, from which smaller and poorer nobles were excluded; but the tension between the whole aristocracy and the towns was much more acute, economically and politically, than any rift within the landed class itself: Otto Hintze, Die Hohenzollern und ihr Werk, Berlin 1915, pp. 146–7.
29. Goodwin, ‘Prussia’, in Goodwin (ed.), The European Nobility in the Eighteenth Century, p. 86.
30. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany 1648–1840, p. 196.
31. Alfred Vagts, A History of Militarism, London 1959, p. 64. Up to 1794, the Prussian Army had been commanded by 895 Generals, from 518 noble families. Foreigners outnumbered burghers in the officer corps throughout.
32. Dorn, ‘The Prussian Bureaucracy in the Eighteenth Century’, Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 46, 1931, No. 3, p. 406, who discusses the workings of the Kriegs-und-Domänen-Kammern. Collegial organization had by no means led to administrative efficacy or dispatch in Spain: the contrast is doubtless in part to be explained by the distinct ethical bearing of Protestantism in Prussia – a variable to which Engels, among others, attached much importance for its rise as a whole.
33. Goodwin, ‘Prussia’, pp. 95–7.
34. See Dorn’s judgement: Competition for Empire, pp. 174–5.
35. For Von Cocceji’s role, see Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and Autocracy, pp. 122–34.
36. Bluche gives a vivid account, Le Despotisme Eclairé, pp. 83–5.
37. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany 1648–1840, p. 268.
38. Ibid., p. 262.
39. Virtually the only important political figure involved in the reforms who was a native Prussian was the educationalist Von Humboldt, although Clausewitz – the greatest intellectual eminence of this generation – was also by birdi a Brandenburger.
40. W. M. Simon, The Failure of the Prussian Reform Movement 1807–1819, New York 1971, pp. 88–104. Peasants had to pay compensation both in land and cash, for the commutation of their labour services to their former masters. These services were still being redeemed by peasants right down to 1865. The estimate for redemption payments given above is drawn from Theodore Hamerow, The Social Foundations of German Unification, Princeton 1969, p. 37.
41. For the military reforms, see Gordon Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army, 1640–1945, New York 1964, pp. 38–53, 69–70.
42. J. Droz, La Formation del’Unité Allemande 1789–1871, Paris 1970, p. 126.
43. John Gillis, ‘Aristocracy and Bureaucracy in Nineteenth Century Prussia’, Past and Present, No. 41, December 1968, p. 113.
44. Hamerow, The Social Foundations of German Unification, p. 59.
45. David Landes, ‘Japan and Europe: Contrasts in Industrialization’ in W. Lockwood (ed.), The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan, Princeton 1965, p. 162. Landes’s essay is essentially an extended comparison between Prussian and Japanese development, and contains many reflections and insights into 19th century German history.
46. Simon, The Failure of the Prussian Reform Movement, p. 104.
47. See Pierre Benaerts, Les Origines de la Grande Industrie Allemande, Paris 1934, pp. 31–52; Droz has some perceptive general comments on the role of the bureaucracy, La Formation de l’Unité Allemande, p. 113.
48. The importance of the trade treaty with France is especially emphasized by Helmut Boehme, Deutschlands Weg zur Grossmacht, Cologne/Berlin 1966, pp. 100–20, 165–6 – a pioneering, if unduly economist, work.
49. Hamerow, The Social Foundations of German Unification, pp. 301–2.
50. Pierre Ayçoberry, L’Unité Allemande (1800–1871), Paris 1968, p. 90.
51. Taylor points out that the North German Confederal Constitution of 1867, from which the Imperial Constitution was derived, contained, indeed, the widest suffrage of any major European country, and the only one with a real secret ballot – preceding the Second Reform Act in England and the advent of the Third Republic in France: A. J. P. Taylor, Bismarck, London 1955, p. 98.
52. For a good account of the Imperial German Constitution, see K. Pinson, Modern Germany. Its History and Civilization, New York 1966, pp. 156–63.
53. The formula is from the Critique of the Gotha Programme’. Marx-Engels, Werke, Bd 19, p. 29.
54. F. Engels, The Role of Force in History, London 1968, pp. 64–5.
55. Marx-Engels, Selected Works, pp. 246–7.
56. Ibid., p. 247.