10 -- Poland

4
Poland
The rise of Prussia from the mid-17th century onwards was counter-pointed by the decline of Poland in the East. The one major country which failed to produce an Absolutist State in the region eventually disappeared, in a graphic a contrario demonstration of the historical rationality of Absolutism for a noble class. The reasons why the Polish szlachta were never able to generate a centralized feudal State do not seem to have been adequately studied; the debacle of this class poses a problem that has not yet been genuinely resolved by modern historiography.1 At most certain critical elements emerge from the existing materials, which suggest partial or possible answers.
Poland suffered less from the late feudal crisis than any other country in Eastern Europe; the Black Death (if not ancillary plagues) largely passed it by, while its neighbours were ravaged. The Piast monarchy, reconstituted in the 14th century, achieved its political and cultural apogee under Casimir III, after 1333. With the decease of this ruler in 1370, the dynasty died out, and the royal title passed to Louis of Anjou, King of Hungary. An absentee monarch, Louis was obliged to grant the Polish nobility the ‘Privilege of Košice’ in 1374, in exchange for confirmation of the right of his daughter Jadwiga to succeed him in Poland: the aristocracy was guaranteed economic immunity from new taxation and administrative autonomy in its localities, in a charter inspired by earlier Hungarian models.2 Twelve years later, Jadwiga was married to Jagiello, Grand Duke of Lithuania, who became King of Poland, founding a personal union between the two realms. This conjunction was to have deep and permanent effects on the whole subsequent course of Polish history. The Lithuanian Duchy was one of the most recent and remarkable structures of the age. A Baltic tribal society, so remote in its marshes and woods that it was still pagan in the late 14th century, had suddenly thrown up a conquering State that became one of the largest territorial empires in Europe. The western pressure from the German military orders in Prussia and Livonia had set off the precipitate formation of a centralized principality among the tribal confederations of Lithuania; the eastern vacuum created by the Mongol subjugation of post-Kievan Russia permitted its rapid expansion outwards in the direction of the Ukraine. Under its successive rulers Gedymin, Olgerd, Jagiello and Witold, Lithuanian power reached to the Oka and the Black Sea. The population of these vast regions was mostly Slav and Christian – Belorussian or Ruthenian; Lithuanian domination of them was exercised by a military overlord-ship that reduced local lords to vassal status. This powerful but primitive State was now linked to the smaller, but much older and more advanced realm of Poland. Jagiello accepted Christianity and moved to Poland to secure the Union of 1386, while his cousin Witold was left in the east to govern Lithuania; with the accession of a foreign prince, the Polish szlachta succeeded in establishing the principle that the monarchy was elective, although in practice it was to be continuously vested in the Jagellonian dynasty for the next two hundred years.
The accrued strength and dynamism of the new Polish-Lithuanian Union was soon demonstrated. In 1410, Jagiello inflicted the historic defeat of Grünewald on the Teutonic Knights, which proved to be the turning-point in the fortunes of the Order in Prussia. At mid-century, Polish attack on Prussia was renewed, when the local German Estates revolted against the rule of the Order. The Thirteen Years’ War ended in 1466 with a decisive Jagellonian victory. By the Second Peace of Torun, Poland annexed West Prussia and Ermland: East Prussia became a Polish fief, held as a vassal by the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, who henceforward owed homage and service in war to the Polish monarchy. The power of the Order was definitively broken, and Poland acquired territorial access to the Baltic. Danzig, the major port of the whole region, became an autonomous city with special municipal rights under Polish royal sovereignty. Casimir IV, the victor of the war, ruled over the most extensive realm in the continent.
Meanwhile, within Poland itself, the later 15th century saw a steady rise in the political and social position of the gentry at the expense both of the monarchy and the peasantry. To secure the succession of his son, Jagiello granted to the nobility in 1425 the principle of neminem captivabimus – legal immunity from arbitrary arrest – in the ‘Privilege of Brześć’. Casimir IV, in his turn, was led to make further concessions to the landowning class. The long struggle of the Thirteen Years’ War necessitated hire of mercenary troops from all over Europe. To obtain the funds needed to pay them, the king granted the aristocracy the ‘Privilege of Nieszawa’ in 1454, which provided for regular conventiones particulares to be held by the gentry in their localities; neither troops nor taxes could henceforward be raised without their consent.3 Under his son John Albert, a consolidated national Assembly or Sejm came into being in 1492, relayed by the provincial and local assemblies (sejmiki) of the landowning class. The Sejm formed a bi-cameral assembly, composed of a Chamber of Deputies and a Senate; the former was composed of elected representatives of the sejmiki, the latter of high clerical and lay dignitaries of the State. Towns were excluded from both: the Polish Estates system which now emerged was exclusively aristocratic.4 In 1505, the Constitution of Radom formally solemnized the powers of the Sejm: the law of nihil novi deprived the monarchy of the right to legislate without the consent of the Estates, while the authority of royal officials was carefully restricted.5 The convocation of the Sejm was still, however, at the discretion of the monarchy.
Meanwhile, it was in this period too that the legal enserfment of the Polish peasantry was decreed. The Statutes of Piotrkow in 1496 banned all labour movement from villages, with the exception of a single peasant from each community a year. They were followed by further measures of adscription in 1501, 1503, 1510 and 15n: signs of the difficulties of implementation. Finally in 1520, an ordinance governing feudal dues was passed which imposed labour services of up to 6 days a week on the Polish wloka or villein.6 The serfdom of the peasantry, which became increasingly rigorous in the course of the 16th century, founded the new prosperity of the szlachta. For the Polish nobility benefited from the Baltic grain boom of the epoch more than any other social group in the region. Peasant plots were steadily whittled down, while demesne farming expanded to meet the demand of the export market. In the second half of the century, the volume of cereals shipped out of the country doubled. During the zenith of the corn traffic from 1550 to 1620, Western inflation assured the landowning class of vast windfall profits from the terms of trade. Over the longer run, it has been calculated that between 1600 and 1750 the value of the magnates’ commercialized production tripled, that of the gentry doubled, while that of the peasantry declined.7 These gains were not, however, productively reinvested. Poland became the granary of Europe, but techniques of arable farming remained primitive, with low yield ratios. Increased agrarian output was achieved by extensive expansion, especially in the frontier lands of the south-east, rather than by intensive improvements of cultivation. Moreover, the Polish aristocracy used its economic power for a more systematically anti-urban policy than any other ruling class in Europe. In the early 16th century, price-ceilings were statutorily imposed on native manufactures in the towns, whose merchant communities were mostly German, Jewish or Armenian. In 1565, foreign merchants were granted exorbitant privileges, whose objective effect was inevitably to weaken and ruin local traders.8 The commercial prosperity of the epoch was still accompanied by urban growth, and wealthy lords founded private towns subject to them, while other nobles were converting iron-works into corn-mills in the countryside. But the municipal autonomy of the urban patriciates was virtually everywhere suppressed, and with it the chances of a developing industry. The Germanic port of Danzig alone escaped the elimination of mediaeval urban privileges by the szlachta: the monopolistic export control which it consequently enjoyed further stifled the inland towns. An agrarian monoculture was thus increasingly created, which imported its manufactured goods from the West in an aristocratic prefiguration of the overseas economies of the 19th century.
The noble class which emerged on these economic foundations had no exact parallel anywhere else in Europe The degree of predial pressure it exercised on the peasantry – with labour services legally permitted of up to 6 days a week – was extreme enough; in 1574 it acquired a formal jus vitae et necis over its serfs, which technically allowed it to execute them at will.9 The aristocracy which controlled these powers was notably unlike its neighbours in composition. For the web of clan kinship, sure sign of a pre-feudal social structure, had survived in the relatively backward and amorphous society of early mediaeval Poland much later than anywhere else, to affect the whole contours of the feudal nobility, as it eventually emerged in a period without any articulated vassal hierarchy.10 For when heraldic insignia were imported from the West in the Middle Ages, they were adopted, not by individual families, but by whole clans, whose kin and client networks still subsisted in the countryside. The result was to create a relatively numerous noble class, comprising perhaps some 700,000 persons or 7–8 per cent of the population in the 16th century. Within this class, there were no titles of rank distinguishing one grade of lordship from another.11 But this juridical equality within the nobility – which had no equivalent elsewhere in early modern Europe – was accompanied by an economic inequality which also had no parallel elsewhere at the time. For a great mass of the szlachta – perhaps more than half their number – owned tiny holdings of 10 to 20 acres, often no larger than those of an average peasant. This stratum was concentrated in the old provinces of Western and Central Poland: in Mazovia, for example, it made up perhaps a fifth of the total population.12 Another large section of the gentry were petty squires with small estates, owning no more than a village or two. Yet side by side within nominally the same nobility, existed some of the largest territorial magnates in Europe, with colossal latifundia, mainly situated in the Lithuanian or Ukrainian East of the country. For in these newer lands, the bequest of the Lithuanian expansion of the 14th century, no comparable heraldic diffusion had occurred, and the higher aristocracy always retained much of the character of a small potentate caste superimposed over an ethnically alien peasantry. In the course of the 16th century, the Lithuanian nobility became increasingly assimilated in culture and institutions to its Polish counterpart, as the local gentry gradually gained rights comparable to the szlachta.13 The constitutional result of this convergence was the Union of Lublin in 1569, which finally merged the two realms into a single polity, the Rzeczpospolita Polska– with a common currency and parliament. On the other hand, no such fusion occurred among the mass of the population in the Eastern provinces, most of whom remained Orthodox in religion and Belorussian or Ruthenian in language. Less than half of the inhabitants of the combined Polish Commonwealth were thus ethnically and linguistically Polish. The ‘colonial’ character of the landlord class in the east and south-east was reflected in the magnitude of its domains. In the late 16th century, the Chancellor John Zamoyski was master of some 2,000,000 acres, mainly in Little Poland, and exercised jurisdiction over some 80 towns and 800 villages.14 In the early 17th century, the Wisnowiecki empire in the Eastern Ukraine extended over lands with 230,000 subjects on them.15 In the 18th century, the Potocki family in the Ukraine owned some 3,000,000 acres; the Radziwill house in Lithuania possessed estates estimated at some 10,000,000 acres.16 There was thus always an extreme tension between the ideology of legal parity and the reality of tremendous economic disparity within the Polish aristocracy.
During the 16th century, nevertheless, the szlachta as a whole probably benefited more than any other group in Eastern Europe from the price revolution. This was the epoch of Brandenburger somnolence and East Prussian decline; Russia was expanding, but amidst fearful convulsions and regressions. Poland was by contrast the largest and wealthiest power in the East. The bulk of the Baltic prosperity fell to it, in the most prosperous epoch of the grain trade. The cultural brilliance of the Polish Renaissance, the background of Copernicus, was one result. Politically, however, it is difficult not to suspect that the early and abundant good fortune of the szlachta in a sense paralysed their capacity for constructive centralization in a later age. Poland, infernus rusticorum for the peasantry, provided an aura libertas for the nobility: no compelling need was felt for a strong State in this squire’s elysium. The comparatively trouble-free passage of Poland through the great economic and demographic crisis of European feudalism in the later Middle Ages, from which it emerged less scathed than any other country of the region, followed by the commercial manna of the early modern epoch, thus perhaps prepared the political disintegration that was to come. Strategically, moreover, the Polish Commonwealth of the 16th century confronted no major military threat. Germany was gripped in the internecine strife of the Reformation. Sweden was still a minor power. Russia was expanding more towards the Volga and the Neva than the Dnieper; the development of the Muscovite State, although starting to look formidable, remained crude and its stability precarious. In the South, the weight of Turkish pressure was directed against the Habsburg frontiers in Hungary and Austria, while Poland was buffered by Moldavia – a weak vassal-State of the Ottoman system. Irregular Tartar raids from the Crimea, although destructive, were a localized problem in the south-east. There was thus no urgent necessity for a centralized royal State, to build up a large military machine against external enemies. The huge size of Poland, and the traditional valour of the szlachta as a heavy feudal cavalry, seemed to guarantee the geographical safety of the possessing class.
Thus just at a time when Absolutism was advancing elsewhere in Europe, the powers of the Polish monarchy were drastically and definitively reduced by the aristocracy. In 1572, the Jagellonian dynasty was extinguished by the death of Sigismund Augustus, leaving the succession vacant. An international auction for the royal dignity followed. In 1573, 40,000 gentry gathered in a viritim assembly on the plains of Warsaw, and elected Henry of Anjou to the monarchy. A foreigner without any links to the country, the French prince was induced to sign the famous Henrician Articles which henceforward became the constitutional charter of the Polish Commonwealth; while a separate device or Pacta Conventa between the monarch and the nobility set the precedent for personal contracts, with specific and binding obligations, to be signed by Polish kings at their accession. By the terms of the Henrician Articles, the non-hereditary character of the monarchy was expressly reconfirmed. The monarch himself was deprived of virtually any substantive powers in the government of the realm. He could not dismiss the civil or military officials in his administration, or enlarge the minuscule army – 3,000 men – at his disposal. The consent of the Sejm, henceforth to be convened every two years, was necessary for any political or fiscal decision of importance. Contravention of these restrictions legalized rebellion against the monarch.17 In other words, Poland became in all but name a nobiliary republic, with a royal figure-head. No native Polish dynasty was ever to preside over the kingdom again: French, Hungarian, Swedish and Saxon rulers were deliberately preferred by the landowning class to ensure the weakness of the central State. The Jagellonian line had enjoyed a large hereditary demesne in its Lithuanian lands: the expatriate kings who now succeeded each other in Poland had no such economic base within the country to sustain them. Both the revenue and troops at the command of the largest magnates were henceforward often to be as large as those of the sovereign himself. Although successful soldier-princes – Bathory, Sobieski – were on occasion to be elected, the monarchy never recovered permanent or substantial powers again. Beneath the dynastic vicissitudes and ethnic heterogeneity of the Polish-Lithuanian Union, there was perhaps also a longer political tradition behind this anomalous outcome. Poland had shared neither in the imperial heritage of the Byzantine nor of the Carolingian realms; its nobility had not experienced an original integration into a royal polity comparable to those of either Kievan Russia or Mediaeval Germany. The clan genealogy of the szlachta had been a token of their distance from them. Its Renaissance thus saw not the autocratic cult of a Tudor or Valois or Habsburg monarchy, but the flowering of an aristocratic commonwealth.
The closing phase of the 16th century gave little hint of the crises ahead. The Pacta Conventa of 1573 were succeeded three years later, after the departure of Henry for France, by the election of the Transylvanian prince Stephen Bathory as King of Poland. Bathory, an able and experienced Magyar general, controlled a personal treasury and army from his nearby Principality, whose relatively prosperous and urbanized economy provided him with independent resources and professional troops. His political authority in Poland was thus powerfully buttressed by his territorial base across the Tatras. A Catholic ruler himself, he promoted the Counter-Reformation in Poland with discretion, avoiding religious provocations to those sections of the nobility which had become Protestant. His reign was illustrated, above all, by military victory in the Baltic Wars against Russia. Taking the field against Ivan IV in 1578, with a mixed army of Polish cavalry, Transylvanian infantry, and Ukrainian Cossacks, Bathory conquered Livonia and swept Russian forces back beyond Polotsk. At his death in 1586, Poland’s primacy in Eastern Europe had never seemed greater. The szlachta’s next choice for the monarchy was Swedish: Sigismund Vasa. In the course of his reign, Polish expansionism appeared to reach its height. Exploiting the political and social upheavals in Russia during the Time of Troubles, Poland sponsored the brief rule of the False Dimitri in 1605–6, a usurper guarded in his capital by Polish troops. Then in 1610, Polish forces under the Hetman Zolkiewski seized Moscow again and installed Sigismund’s son Władysław as Tsar. Russian popular reaction and Swedish counter-manoeuvres compelled the Polish garrison to evacuate Moscow in 1612, and the Tsardom was secured by the Romanov dynasty the following year. But Polish intervention in the Time of Troubles nevertheless ended with major territorial gains at the Truce of Deulino in 1618, by which Poland annexed a large belt of White Russia. The Rzeczpospolita attained its widest frontiers in these years.
Nevertheless, two fatal geo-political flaws marred this Polish State even while the prowess of the gentry husarja was unmatched in cavalry warfare. They were both symptoms of the monadic individualism of the Polish ruling class. On the one hand, Poland had failed to finish off German rule in East Prussia. The Jagellonian victories over the Teutonic Order in the 15th century had reduced the German knights to vassals of the Polish monarchy. In the early 16th century, the secularization of the Order by its Grand Master was accepted, in exchange for the maintenance of Polish overlordship over what now became Ducal Prussia. In 1563, Sigismund August – the last Jagellonian ruler – had then accepted coinfeudation of the Duchy by the Margravate of Brandenburg, for transient diplomatic advantages. Fifteen years later, Bathory sold the guardianship of the East Prussian Duke to the Brandenburg Elector, for cash to wage the war with Russia. Finally, in 1618, the Polish monarchy permitted the dynastic unification of East Prussia with Brandenburg, under a common Hohenzollern ruler. Thus, in a series of juridical concessions which was eventually to end with a full renunciation of Polish suzerainty, the Duchy was delivered over to the Hohenzollerns. The strategic folly of this course was soon to become clear. By failing to secure and integrate East Prussia, Poland lost the chance of controlling the Baltic littoral and never became a maritime power. Lack of a fleet was thus to render it readily vulnerable to amphibious invasions from the North. The reasons for this inertia are doubtless to be found in the character of the nobility. Mastery of the coast and construction of a navy both demanded a powerful State machine, capable of evicting the Junkers from East Prussia and mobilizing the public investment necessary for forts, shipyards and port establishments. The Petrine State in Russia could do this as soon as it reached the Baltic. The Polish szlachta were not interested. They were content to rely on the traditional arrangement of corn transport through Danzig in Dutch or German cargoes. Royal control over the commercial policies of Danzig was relinquished in the 1570’s; the few harbours built for a small navy were abandoned in the 1640’s.18 The gentry were indifferent to the fate of the Baltic. Their expansion was to take quite another form – a drive into the south-east frontier regions of the Ukraine. Here private penetration and colonization was possible and profitable; there was no state system to resist this advance; and no economic innovations were needed to create new latifundia from the exceptionally fertile lands on either side of the Dnieper. In the early 17th century, Polish landlordism thus sprawled ever deeper beyond Volhynia and Podolia, into the Eastern Ukraine. The enserfment of the local Ruthenian peasantry, exacerbated by religious conflicts between Catholic and Orthodox Churches, and complicated by the turbulent presence of the Cossack settlements, made this wild zone a constant security problem. Economically the most profitable projection of the Commonwealth, it was socially and politically the most explosive region within the nobiliary State. The reorientation of the szlachta away from the Baltic towards the Black Sea was thus to prove doubly disastrous for Poland. Its ultimate consequences were to be the Ukrainian Revolution and the Swedish Deluge.
In the first years of the 17th century, disquieting signs of incipient crisis were already becoming visible within Poland. By the turn of the century, the limits of the traditional agrarian economy in the central zone, which had provided the productive basis of Polish power abroad, were starting to be felt. The growth of manorialism had not been accompanied by any real improvements in productivity: the arable acreage had increased while techniques remained largely stationary. Moreover, the penalties for the inordinate extension of demesne cultivation at the expense of peasant tenures now became evident. There were symptoms of rural exhaustion even before corn prices started to drop with the European depression that set in slowly from the 1620’s onwards. Production started to fall off, and more seriously, yields to decline.19 At the same time, the political cohesion of the State was critically weakened by new derogations from the central authority tenuously maintained by the monarchy. In 1607–9, a serious gentry revolt against Sigismund III – the Zebrzydowski rebellion – forced the king to abandon plans for a reformed royal power. From 1613 onwards, the national Sejm devolved tax-assessments downwards to the local sejmiki, making any effective fiscal system still more difficult to achieve. In the 1640’s, the sejmiki gained further financial and military autonomy in their localities. Meanwhile, the contemporary revolution in military techniques was passing the szlachta by: its skill as a cavalry class was increasingly anachronistic in battles decided by trained infantry and mobile artillery. The central army of the Commonwealth was still only some 4,000 at mid-century, and was subtracted from royal control by the independent command of life-long hetmans over it; while border magnates often kept private armies of virtually equivalent size.20 In the 1620’s, the rapid Swedish conquest of Livonia, mastery of the East Prussian littoral and extortion of heavy Baltic tolls, had already revealed the vulnerability of Polish defences in the North; while in the South, repeated Cossack risings in the 1630’s had been pacified with difficulty. The stage was now set for the spectacular breakdown of the country in the reign of the last Vasa king, John Casimir.
In 1648, the Ukrainian Cossacks revolted under Khmelnitsky, and a peasant jacquerie against the Polish landlord class spread in their wake. In 1654, the Cossack leaders took vast portions of the South-East with them into the enemy Russian State, with the Treaty of Pereyaslavl; Russian armies marched westwards, capturing Minsk and Wilno. In 1655, Sweden launched a devastating pincer attack through Pomerania and Courland; Brandenburg allied with it for a joint invasion. Warsaw and Cracow rapidly fell to Swedish and Prussian troops, while the Lithuanian magnates hastened to defect to Charles X, and John Casimir fled to an Austrian refuge. The Swedish occupation of Poland aroused the szlachta to fierce local resistance. International intervention to block the enlargement of the Swedish Empire followed: Dutch fleets covered Danzig, Austrian diplomacy aided the fugitive king, Russian troops assailed Livonia and Ingria, and finally Denmark struck at Sweden in the rear. The result was to clear Poland of Swedish armies by 1660, after immense destruction. War with Russia lasted another seven years. By the time the Commonwealth was at peace again in 1667, after nearly two decades of fighting, it had lost the Eastern Ukraine with Kiev, the long border lands centred on Smolensk, and all residual claims over East Prussia; in the next decade, Turkey seized Podolia. Geographical losses amounted to a fifth of Polish territory. But the economic, social and political effects of these disastrous years were much graver. The Swedish armies which had swept the country had left it ravaged and depopulated from end to end: the rich Vistula valley was worst hit of all. The population of Poland dropped by a third between 1650 and 1675, while grain exports through Danzig fell by over 80 per cent between 1618 and 1691.21 Cereal output collapsed in many regions because of the devastation and demographic decline; yields never recovered. There was a contraction of cultivated area, and many szlachta were ruined. The economic crisis after the war accelerated the concentration of land, in conditions where the great magnates alone had the resources to reorganize production and many smaller estates were up for sale. Servile exactions intensified amidst a new stagnation. Debasement of currency and depression of wages withered the towns.
Culturally, the szlachta took its revenge on the history which had disappointed it by a morbid mythomania: an astonishing cult of imaginary ‘Sarmatian’ ancestors in the pre-feudal past was combined with provincial Counter-Reformation bigotry, in a country where urban civilization now largely ebbed away. The pseudo-atavistic ideology of Sarmatianism was not a mere aberration: it reflected the state of the whole class, which found its most vivid expression in the constitutional realm proper. For politically, the combined impact of the Ukrainian Revolution and the Swedish Deluge shattered the brittle unity of the Polish Commonwealth. The great divide in the history and prosperity of the noble class did not rally it to the creation of a central state that could have withstood further external attacks: it plunged, on the contrary, into a suicidal fuite en avant From the mid-17th century onwards, the anarchic logic of the Polish polity achieved a kind of institutional paroxysm with the rule of parliamentary unanimity – the famous liherum veto.22 A single negative vote could henceforward dissolve the Sejm and paralyse the State. The liberum veto was first exercised by a deputy to the Sejm in 1652: its use increased rapidly thereafter, and was extended downwards to the provincial sejmiki, of which there were now more than seventy. The landowning class, which had long rendered the executive virtually impotent, thus now neutralized the legislature as well. The eclipse of royal authority was henceforward complemented by the disintegration of representative government. In practice, chaos was only avoided by the enhanced dominance within the nobility of the great Eastern magnates, whose vast latifundia tilled by Ruthenian and White Russian serfs gave them preponderance over the smaller squires of Western and Central Poland. A clientage system thus gave some organized framework to the szlachta class, although rivalries between the magnate families – Czartoryski, Sapieha, Potocki, Radziwill and so on – constantly rent the unity of the nobility: for at the same time it was they who used the liberum veto most frequently.23 The constitutional obverse of the Veto’ was the ‘confederation’: a juridical device which permitted aristocratic factions to proclaim themselves in a state of armed insurrection against the government.24 Ironically, majority voting and military discipline were legally prescribed for rebel confederations, while the unitary Sejm was constantly immobilized by political intrigue and unanimous voting. The successful noble rising led by the Grand Marshal Lubomirski, which prevented any election vivente rege of a successor to John Casimir in 1665–6, and precipitated the abdication of the king, presaged the future pattern of magnate politics. In the age of Louis XIV and Peter I, a radical and total negation of Absolutism was born on the Vistula.
Poland still remained the second largest country in Europe. In the last decades of the 17th century, the soldier-king John Sobieski restored something of its external position. Brought to power by the danger of renewed Turkish attacks in Podolia, Sobieski managed to increase the central army to 12,000, and modernized it by the addition of dragoon and infantry units. Polish forces played the premier role in the relief of Vienna in 1683, and Ottoman advances in the Dniester region were checked. But the major benefits of this last successful mobilization of the szlachta were reaped by the Habsburg Emperor; Polish aid against Turkey merely allowed Austrian Absolutism to expand rapidly towards the Balkans. At home, Sobieski’s international reputation availed him little. All his projects for a hereditary monarchy were blocked; the liberum veto became ever more frequent in the Sejm. In Lithuania, where the Sapieha clan wielded vast powers, the royal writ virtually ceased altogether. In 1696, the gentry rejected his son as a successor: a disputed election ended with the installation of another expatriate prince, Augustus II of Saxony, backed by Russia. The new Wettin ruler tried to use Saxon industrial and military resources to establish a more conventional royal State, with a more cogent economic programme. A Saxo-Polish trading company was planned for the Baltic, and port construction renewed, while Wettin troops brought Lithuania to heel.25 The szlachta soon reacted: in 1699 pacta conventa were imposed on Augustus II stipulating the withdrawal of his German army from the country. In collusion with Peter I, he then moved it north across the border for an attack on Swedish Livonia. This action precipitated the Great Northern War in 1700. The Sejm strenuously disavowed the private schemes of the king, but Swedish counter-attack against Saxon forces in 1701–2 soon plunged the country into the vortex of the war. Charles XII, after much destructive fighting, overran Poland, declared Augustus II deposed, and installed a native pretender, Stanislas Leszczynski. Confronted with occupation, the nobility split: the great Eastern magnates (as in 1655) opted for Sweden, while the mass of the smaller Western squires reluctantly rallied to the Saxo-Russian alliance. Charles XII’s defeat at Poltava restored Augustus II to Poland. But when in 1713–14 the Saxon king tried to reintroduce his army and to augment royal power, an insurgent Confederation was promptly formed, and Russian military intervention imposed the Treaty of Warsaw on Augustus II in 1717. At the dictation of a Russian envoy, the Polish army was fixed at 24,000, Saxon troops were limited to 1,200 personal guards for the king, and German officials in the administration were repatriated.26
The Great Northern War had proved to be a second Deluge. The harshness of Swedish occupation and the desolation left by successive campaigns of Scandinavian, German and Russian armies over Polish soil took a massive toll. The population of Poland, damaged by war and plague, dropped to some 6,000,000. The economic exactions of the three powers which disputed strategic control of the country – some 60 million thalers in all – amounted to three times the total public revenues of the Commonwealth during the conflict.27 More gravely still, Poland was for the first time a prostrate object of the international struggle fought across it. The political passivity of the szlachta in the triangular contest between Charles XII, Peter I and Augustus II was broken only by its sullen resistance to any move that might strengthen royal power in Poland, and with it Polish defence capacity. Augustus II, whose base in Saxony was wealthier and more advanced than Transylvania had been, was unable to repeat the experience of Bathory, over a century later. To frustrate any fruition from the Saxo-Polish Union, the gentry were prepared to accept a Russian protectorate. The invitation to St Petersburg to invade in 1717 inaugurated an epoch of increasing submission to Tsarist manoeuvres in Eastern Europe.
In 1733, the election to the monarchy was again disputed. France tried to secure the candidature of Leszczynski, as a native Pole and ally of Paris. Russia, backed by Prussia and Austria, opted for a Saxon succession as the weaker alternative: despite Leszczynski’s legitimate election, Augustus III was duly imposed by foreign bayonets. The new ruler, unlike his father an absentee monarch who resided in Dresden, made no attempt to recast the political system in Poland. Warsaw ceased to be a capital, as the country became one vast provincial backwater, occasionally traversed by neighbouring armies. Saxon ministers distributed sinecures in State and Church, while magnate factions lowered vetos on the Sejm at the behest or hire of competing foreign powers – Russia, Austria, Prussia, France.28 The szlachta, which during the height of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation had maintained standards of religious tolerance rare in Europe, was now in the epoch of the Enlightenment gripped with a forgotten Catholic fanaticism: the persecutory fevers of the gentry became the ruined symptom of its ‘patriotism’. Economically, there was a gradual recovery in the later 18th century. Population rose once again to pre-Deluge levels, while cereal exports through Danzig doubled in the forty years after the Great Northern War, although still remaining far below peak levels of the previous century. Concentration of lands and serfs continued, to the benefit of the magnates.29
In 1764, Poniatowski – a Polish paramour of Catherine II, linked to the Czartoryski clique – became the new Russian-picked monarch. Initial permission from St Petersburg to proceed to centralist reforms was soon revoked, on the pretext of the suppression (advocated by the Czartoryskis) of rights for Orthodox and Protestant subjects in Poland. Russian troops intervened in 1767, finally provoking a gentry reaction against foreign dominance, under the flag not of political reform but religious intolerance. The Confederation of Bar in 1768 revolted against both Poniatowski and Russia, in the name of Catholic exclusivism. Ukrainian peasants seized the opportunity to rise against their Polish landlords, while French and Turkish aid was sent to the Confederate levies. After four years of fighting, the Confederation was crushed by Tsarist armies. The diplomatic imbroglio of Russia with Prussia and Austria over this affair resulted in the first Partition of Poland in 1772, a scheme to reconcile the three courts. The Habsburg monarchy took Galicia; the Romanov monarchy seized much of White Russia; the Hohenzollern monarchy acquired West Prussia, and with it the prize of complete control of the South Baltic littoral. Poland lost 30 per cent of its territory and 35 per cent of its population. Physically, it was still larger than Spain. But the advertisement of its impotence was now unmistakable.
The shock of the First Partition created a belated majority within the nobility for a revision of the structure of the State. The growth of an urban bourgeoisie in Warsaw, which quadrupled in size during the reign of Poniatowski, helped to secularize the ideology of the landowning class. In 1788–91, the unreliable consent of Prussia was won for a new constitutional settlement: the Sejm in its last hours voted the abolition of the liberum veto and the suppression of the right of confederation, the establishment of a hereditary monarchy, the creation of an army of 100,000, and the introduction of a land tax and somewhat wider franchise.30 Russian retribution was swift and condign. In 1792, Catherine II’s soldiers invaded behind a front of Lithuanian magnates, and the Second Partition was executed. Poland lost three-fifths of its remaining territory in 1793 and was reduced to a population of 4,000,000; this time Russia took the lion’s share, annexing the whole of the rest of the Ukraine, while Prussia absorbed Poznania. The finale of the Rzeczpospolita came two years later, amidst an apocalyptic confusion and explosion of epochs and classes. In 1794, a national and liberal insurrection erupted under Kosciuszko, a veteran of the American Revolution and a citizen of the French Republic: the mass of the gentry enlisted in a cause which called for the emancipation of the serfs and rallied the plebeian masses of the capital, mingling cross-currents of Sarmatianism and Jacobinism in a desperate, distorted awakening of the nobility under the combined impact of alien Absolutism in the East and bourgeois revolution in the West. The radicalism of the Polish Insurrection of 1794 pronounced the death-sentence on the szlachta State. For the legitimist courts which surrounded it, a remote, reflected glare from the fires of the Seine could suddenly be seen along the Vistula. The territorial ambitions of the three neighbouring Empires now acquired the ideological urgency of a counter-revolutionary mission. After Kosciuszko had defeated a Prussian attack on Warsaw, Suvorov was dispatched with a Russian army to stamp out the uprising. The defeat of the revolt was the end of Polish independence. In 1795, the country disappeared altogether under the Third Partition.
The inner reasons why the uniquely wayward and riotous nobility that ruled Poland was unable to achieve a national Absolutism have doubtless yet to be fully explored:31 only some elements of an explanation have been proposed here. But the feudal State it produced provided a singular clarification of the reasons why Absolutism was the natural and normal form of noble class power after the late Middle Ages. For in effect, once the integrated chain of mediate sovereignties which constituted the mediaeval political system was dissolved, the nobility had no natural spring of unification. The aristocracy was customarily divided into a vertical hierarchy of ranks, which were in structural contradiction with any horizontal distribution of representation, such as was later to characterize bourgeois political systems. An external principle of unity was therefore imperative to weld it together: the function of Absolutism was precisely to impose a rigorous formal order on it from without. Hence the possibility of the constant conflicts between Absolutist rulers and their aristocracies, which, as we have seen, occurred all over Europe. These tensions were inscribed in the very nature of the solidary relationship between the two, since no immanent mediation of interests was practicable within the noble class. Absolutism could only govern ‘for’ the aristocracy by remaining ‘above’ it. In Poland alone, the paradoxical size of the szlachta and formal absence of any titles within it, produced a self-destructive caricature of a representative system proper, within the gentry. The incompatibility of the two was bizarrely demonstrated by the liberum veto. For within such a system, there was no reason why any individual noble should forego his sovereignty: the provincial sejmiki could be dissolved by a single squire, and the Sejm by the delegate of a single sejmik. Informal clientage could not provide an adequate substitute principle of unity. Anarchy, impotence and annexation were the inevitable results. The nobiliary republic was finally obliterated by the neighbouring Absolutisms. It was Montesquieu who wrote the epitaph on this experience, some years before the end: ‘No monarchy, no nobility; no nobility, no monarchy.’

1. This emerges unmistakably from a representative recent survey of the causes adduced for the Partitions by Polish historians, many of which do little more than restate the problem: BoguslawLesnodarski, ‘Les Partages de la Pologne. Analyse des Causes et Essai d’une Théorie’, Acta Poloniae Historica, VII, 1963, pp. 7–30.
2. For this episode, see O. Halecki, ‘From the Union with Hungary to the Union with Lithuania’, W. F. Reddaway et al. (ed.), The Cambridge History of Poland, I, Cambridge 1950, pp. 19–193.
3. See A. Gieysztor, in S. Kieniewicz (ed.), History of Poland, Warsaw 1968, pp. 145–6.
4. Burghers from Cracow and (later) Wilno were admitted to the proceedings of the Sejm but had no vote.
5. J. Tazbir, in Kieniewicz (ed.), History of Poland, p. 176.
6. R. F. Leslie, The Polish Question, London 1964, p. 4.
7. Witold Kula, ‘Un’ Economia Agraria senza Accumulazione: La Polonia dei Seicoli XVI-XVIII, Studi Storici, No. 3–4, 1968, pp. 615–16. Income variations were much less, of course, because of the subsistence character of most peasant production (reckoned by Kula at some 90 per cent).
8. Tazbir minimizes the immediate practical results of this measure, but its intention is clear enough: Tazbir, History of Poland, p. 178.
9. Leslie, The Polish Question, pp. 4–5.
10. These clans were not direct descendants of tribal units of organization, but more recent formations modelled on them. For the whole problem of clan heraldry in Poland, see K. Gorski, ‘Les Structures Sociales de la Noblesse Polonaise au Moyen Age’, Le Moyen Age, 1967, pp. 73–85. Etymologically, the world szlachta probably derives from the Old High German slahta (Modern German Geschlecht), meaning family or race, although its origin is not absolutely certain. It may be noted that the Hungarian nobility was not dissimilar to the Polish in size and character, again because of the presence of pre-feudal clan principles in its initial formation: but the two cases should not be confused, since the Magyars were, of course, a nomadic people until the late 10th century, and hence had a very different anterior history and social structure from the Western Slavs.
11. For a sociological sketch, see Andrzej Zajaczkowski, ‘Cadres Structurels de la Noblesse’, Annates ESC, January-February 1968, pp. 88–102. Lithuanian magnates claiming descent from Gedymin or Rurik used the honorific title ‘Prince’, but this pretension had no legal force.
12. P. Skwarczyński, ‘Poland and Lithuania’, The New Cambridge Modern History of Europe, III, p. 400.
13. For this process, see Vernadsky, Russia at the Dawn of the Modern Age, pp. 196–200. Vernadsky’s book includes one of the fullest accounts of the Lithuanian State available, under the rubric of ‘West Russia’. For the background and provisions of the Union of Lublin, partly determined by military pressure on Lithuania by Muscovy, see pp. 241–8.
14. Tazbir, History of Poland, p. 196: in addition to his own domains, Zamoyski controlled vast tracts of the royal demesne. The lands belonging to the monarchy in Poland were widely alienated as security on loans to magnate creditors.
15. A. Maczak, ‘The Social Distribution of Landed Property in Poland from the 16th to the 18th Century’, Third International Conference of Economic History, p. 461.
16. B. Boswell, ‘Poland’, in A. Goodwin (ed.), The European Nobility in the 18th Century, pp. 167–8.
17. For the Henrician Articles and the Pacta Conventa, see F. Nowak, ‘The Interregna and Stephen Batory’, The Cambridge History of Poland, I, pp. 372–3. The best general account of the Polish constitutional system as it emerged in this epoch is provided by Skwarczyński, ‘The Constitution of Poland Before the Partitions’, The Cambridge History of Poland, II, pp. 49–67.
18. H. Jabłonowski, ‘Poland-Lithuania 1609–1648’, The New Cambridge Modern History of Europe, IV, Cambridge 1970, pp. 600–1.
19. Jerzy Topolski, ‘La Régression Economique en Pologne du XVIe au XVIIIe Siècle’, Acta Poloniae Historica, VII, 1962, pp. 28–49.
20. Tazbir, History of Poland, p. 224. In theory, of course, a general levy of the gentry was supposed to provide the main force for foreign wars.
21. Henry Willetts, ‘Poland and the Evolution of Russia’, in Trevor-Roper (ed.), The Age of Expansion, p. 265. For a close-up of the ravages of the Deluge in one region, Mazovia, see I. Gieysztorowa, ‘Guerre et Régression en Mazovie aux XVIe et XVIIe Siècles’, Annates ESC, October-November 1958, pp. 651–68, which also shows the economic decline that had set in there before the war, from the early 17th century onwards. The population of Mazovia decreased from 638,000 to 305,000 between 1578 and 1661, or some 52 per cent.
22. The classic study of this singular device is L. Konopczynski, Le Liberum Veto, Paris 1930. Konopczynski was able to find only one parallel to it elsewhere: the formal right of dissentimiento in Aragon. But the Aragonese veto was comparatively innocuous in practice.
23. Deputy Sicinski, who inaugurated the use of the veto in 1652, was the catspaw of Boguslaw Radziwill. For a statistical analysis of the exercise of the liberum veto over the next hundred years which shows its pronounced regional pattern - 80 per cent of deputies exercising it originated from Lithuania or Little Poland, see Konopczynski, Le Liberum Veto, pp. 217–18. The Potocki family held the record for magnate use of the veto.
24. For the device of the ‘confederation’, see Skwarczyński, ‘The Constitution of Poland before the Partitions’, p. 60.
25. For a recent revaluation of early Saxon plans in Poland, see J. Gierowski and A. Kaminski, ‘The Eclipse of Poland’, The New Cambridge Modern History of Europe, VI, pp. 687–8.
26. Actually, although 24,000 troops were permitted by the Treaty of Warsaw, only some 12,000 were subsequently raised; since the pre-war size of the central army had been 18,000, the result was another reduction of Polish military strength: E. Rostworowski, History of Poland, pp. 281–2, 289.
27. Gierowski and Kaminski, ‘The Eclipse of Poland’, pp. 704–5. In 1650, the population of Poland had been some 10,000,000.
28. After the initial imposition of Augustus III, every session of the Sejm, of which there were thirteen during the reign, was broken up by use of the liberum veto.
29. Montesquieu’s comments on the country were typical enough of Enlightenment opinion at the time: ‘Poland . . . has virtually none of those things which we call the movable goods of the universe, apart from the wheat of its lands. A few lords possess entire provinces; they squeeze the peasants for a greater quantity of wheat to send abroad, with which to procure themselves the objects of their luxury. If Poland did not trade with any other nation, its people would be happier.’ De L’Esprit des Lois, Paris 1961, II, p. 23.
30. For the Constitution of 1791, see R. F. Leslie, Polish Politics and the Revolution of November 1830, London 1956, pp. 27–8.
31. Foreign political tutelage was certainly accepted more readily by the szlachta because of its relative lack of impingement on the economic interests of the gentry as a class. On the other hand, it is also clear that the gentry tolerated the progressive erosion of national independence for so long, partly just because it had previously failed to produce a centralized State of its own. Had there been a Polish Absolutism of any sort, partition would have deprived a critical sector of the nobility of its positions in the State machine – so important and so lucrative for aristocracies elsewhere in Europe; and there would have been a much earlier and fiercer reaction to the prospect of annexation. The final change of mood and aims behind the belated attempt to create a reformed monarchy in the 18th century also needs to be better understood, for a satisfactory explanation of the record of the szlachta.