11 -- Austria

5
Austria
The Austrian State in a sense represented the constitutional antipode of the Polish Commonwealth. For it was more exclusively and entirely founded on the organizing principle of dynasticism than any other in Europe. The Habsburg line was to have few equals in the length of its rule: it held sway in Austria from the late 13th uninterruptedly through to the early 20th centuries. More significantly, the only political unity of the varied lands that eventually came to be the Austrian Empire was the identity of the regnant dynasty above them. The Habsburg State always remained, to a unique degree, a familial Hausmacht – an assortment of dynastic heritages, without a common ethnic or territorial denomination. Monarchy here achieved its most unadulterated ascendancy. Yet Austrian Absolutism, for this very reason, never succeeded in creating a coherent and integrated state structure comparable to that of its Prussian and Russian rivals. It always to some extent represented a hybrid of ‘Western’ and ‘Eastern’ forms, because of the political and territorial divisions of its constituent lands lying across the Baltic-Adriatic line, in the geometrical centre of Europe. The Austrian case thus in certain important respects cross-cuts a regional typology of European Absolutism. It is this peculiar geographical and historical position that lends a special interest to the development of the Habsburg State: ‘Central Europe’ appropriately produced an Absolutism formally intermediate in character, whose divergence from the strict norms of West or East both confirms and nuances their polarity. The heteroclite structures of Austrian Absolutism reflect the composite nature of the territories over which it presided, and which it was never able in any lasting fashion to compress into a single political framework. Yet at the same time, its blend of motifs did not preclude a dominant key. The Austrian Empire which emerged in the course of the 17th century proved – despite appearances – not to be readily fissile, because it contained one essential social uniformity that rendered its variant parts compatible with each other. Serf agriculture predominated, with different shades and patterns, in the Habsburg lands as a whole. The great majority of the peasant populations ruled by the dynasty – Czech, Slovak, Hungarian, German or Austrian – were tied to the soil, owing labour services to their lords and subject to seigneurial jurisdictions. The respective peasantries of these lands did not constitute an undifferentiated rural mass: the distinctions in their condition were of considerable importance. But there can be no doubt of the overall prevalence of serfdom within the Austrian Empire, in the age of the Counter-Reformation when it first took durable shape. Taxonomically, therefore, the Habsburg State must in its total configuration be classified as an Eastern Absolutism; and in practice, as will be seen, its unusual administrative traits did not conceal its ultimate descent.
The Habsburg family originated in the Upper Rhineland, and first achieved prominence in 1273, when Count Rudolph of Habsburg was elected Emperor by German princes anxious to thwart the rise of the Premyslid king of Bohemia, Ottokar II, who had annexed most of the Austrian lands in the East and was the leading contender for the imperial dignity. The Habsburg domains were clustered along the Rhine, in three separate clumps: in Sundgau to the west of the river, Breisgau to the east of it and Aargau to the south of it, beyond Basle. Rudolph I successfully mobilized an imperial coalition to attack Ottokar II, who was defeated at Marchfeld five years later: the Habsburg line therewith acquired control of the Austrian Duchies – far larger than their Rhenish territories – to which it henceforward transferred its principal seat. The strategic objectives of the dynasty were now two-fold: to keep hold of the imperial succession, with its nebulous but considerable political and ideological leverage within Germany, and to consolidate and enlarge the territorial basis of its power. The newly won Austrian duchies formed a substantial block of hereditary Erblande, making the Habsburgs for the first time an important force within German politics. But they remained somewhat excentric to the Reich: the obvious route of aggrandizement was to link up the new Austrian bastions with the old Rhenish lands of the dynasty, to form a single geographical block running across South Germany, with direct access to the centres of Imperial wealth and power. To secure his election, Rudolph I had given pledges of non-aggression in the Rhineland,1 but all the early Habsburg rulers pressed vigorously for the expansion and unification of their domains. This first, historic drive to construct a magnified Germanic State encountered, however, a fatal obstacle in its path. In between the Rhenish and Austrian lands lay the Swiss cantons. Habsburg encroachments in this pivotal region provoked a popular resistance that again and again defeated Austrian armies, and eventually led to the creation of Switzerland as an autonomous confederation outside the Empire altogether.
The peculiarity, and interest, of the Swiss revolt is that it coalesced two social elements within the complex inventory of European feudalism not found anywhere else together in similar union: mountains and towns. This was, also, the secret of its unique success in a century where everywhere else peasant insurrections were defeated. From the very outset of the Middle Ages, as we have seen, the feudal mode of production always had a very uneven topographical spread: it never penetrated the uplands to the extent to which it conquered the plains and the marshes. Mountainous regions all over Western Europe represented remote fastnesses of small peasant property, allodial or communal, whose rocky and exiguous soil offered relatively little attraction for manorialism. The Swiss Alps, the highest range in the continent, were naturally a foremost example of this pattern. They also, however, lay across one of the main overland commercial routes of mediaeval Europe, between the two densely urbanized zones of Southern Germany and Northern Italy. Their valleys were thus also settled with local trading towns, taking advantage of a strategic situation among the high passes. The Swiss cantonalism of the 14th century was the product of the conflux of these forces. Initially influenced by the example of the nearby Lombard communes in their struggle against the Empire, the Swiss revolt against the Habsburgs united rural mountaineers and urban burgesses – a victorious combination. The political lead was taken by the three ‘forest cantons’, whose peasant infantry routed the Austrian seigneurial cavalry, hobbled in the narrow valleys, at Morgarten in 1315. Serfdom was consequently abolished in Uri, Schwyz and Unterwaiden within a decade.2 In 1330 there was a municipal revolution in Lucerne, in 1336 in Zurich, both against proHabsburg patriciates. By 1351, a formal alliance between these two cities and three forest cantons existed. Finally, their joint troops repulsed and defeated the Habsburg armies at Sempach and Näfels, in 1386 and 1388. In 1393 the Swiss Confederation was born: a unique independent republic in Europe.3 Swiss peasant pikemen were to go on to become the crack military force of late mediaeval and early modern warfare, bringing to an end the long dominance of cavalry with their victories over the Burgundian knights summoned to Austrian aid in the next century, and inaugurating the new prowess of mercenary infantry. By the early 15th century, the Habsburg dynasty had lost its lands below the bend of the Rhine to the Swiss, and had failed to unite its possessions in Sundgau and Breisgau.4 Its Rhenish provinces were no more than scattered enclaves, symbolically relabelled Vorderösterreich and administered from Innsbruck. The whole orientation of the dynasty henceforward shifted to the East.
In Austria itself, meanwhile, Habsburg power had not encountered the same misadventures. The Tyrol was acquired in 1363; the title of Archduke assumed at about the same time; the Estates which emerged after 1400 were, after some sharp struggles, kept in reasonable check. By 1440, the Imperial office – lost in the early 14th century, after the first defeats in Switzerland – had been recaptured by the dynasty with the collapse of Luxemburg power in Bohemia, and was never to pass seriously out of its control again thereafter. In 1477, a marital alliance with the House of Burgundy – Austrian ally in the anti-Swiss struggle – secured it the temporary windfall of the Franche-Comté and Netherlands. Before they passed into the Spanish orbit in the epoch of Charles V, however, the Burgundian domains probably furnished the House of Austria with the inspiration for its first steps towards administrative modernity. Maximilian I, surrounded by an entourage of Burgundian-Netherlandish nobles, created a central treasury in Innsbruck, and established the first conciliar agencies of government in Austria. A final attack into Switzerland proved abortive; but Gorizia was absorbed in the Southern marchlands, while Maximilian pursued a forward Italian and Imperial foreign policy. It was his successor Ferdinand I, however, whose reign suddenly marked out the capacious site of future Habsburg power in Central Europe, and laid the foundations of the strange State structure that was to be erected above it. In 1526, the Jagiello King of Bohemia and Hungary, Louis II, was defeated and killed at Mohacs by advancing Ottoman armies; Turkish troops overran most of Hungary, pushing the power of the Sultanate deep into Central Europe. Ferdinand successfully laid claim to the vacant monarchies, his marriage ties to the Jagiello line seconded by the Turkish threat, as far as the Czech and Magyar nobility were concerned. In Moravia and Silesia, the two outlying provinces of the Bohemian Realm, Ferdinand was accepted as a hereditary ruler; but the Bohemian and Hungarian Estates themselves categorically refused him this title, extracting an express acknowledgement from the Archduke that he was merely an elective prince in their lands. Ferdinand, moreover, had to fight a long three-cornered struggle against the Transylvanian pretender Zapolyai and the Turks, which ended in 1547 with the partition of Hungary into three zones: a Habsburg-ruled West, a Turkish-occupied Centre, and a Transylvanian principality in the East that was henceforward an Ottoman vassal state. War dragged on against the Turks in the Danubian plains for another decade, from 1551 to 1562: throughout the 16th century, Hungary cost the Habsburg dynasty more in defence expenditure than it yielded in revenues.5
Nevertheless, with all their internal and external limitations, the new domains represented a vast potential increase in Habsburg international power. Ferdinand persistently endeavoured to build up royal authority throughout his lands, creating new dynastic institutions and centralizing old ones. The various Austrian Landtage were relatively compliant at this stage, assuring Habsburg rule a reasonably secure political base in the Archduchy itself. The Bohemian and Hungarian Estates were by no means so docile, and foiled Ferdinand’s plans for a supreme Assembly covering all his dominions, capable of imposing a single currency and levying uniform taxes. But a cluster of new governmental agencies in Vienna greatly increased the reach of the dynasty, among them the Hofkanzlei (Court Chancellery) and the Hofkammer (Court Treasury). The most important of these institutions was the Imperial Privy Council, set up in 1527, which soon became the formal apex of the whole Habsburg administrative system in Central Europe.6 The ‘imperial’ origins and orientation of this council were an index of the abiding importance of its German ambitions in the Reich to the House of Austria. Ferdinand attempted to further these by reviving an Imperial Aulic Council as the highest judicial court of the Empire, under the direct control of the Emperor. But since the Imperial Constitution had been reduced by the German princes to an empty legislative and judicial shell without any executive or coercive authority, the political gains were limited.7 Much more significant in the long-run was the introduction of a permanent War Council, the Hofkriegsrat, created in 1556 and firmly focussed from the start on the ‘Eastern’ front of Habsburg operations rather than the ‘Western’. Designed to organize military resistance to the Turks, the Hojkriegsrat was relayed by a local War Council in Graz, which coordinated the special ‘Military Borders’ created along the South-Eastern frontiers, in which were planted soldier-colonies of free-booting Serb and Bosnian Grenzers.8 Ottoman strength had by no means relaxed. From 1593 onwards, the Thirteen Years’ War raged across Hungary; at the end of it, after successive devastations of the country which left Magyar agriculture in ruins and the Magyar peasantry in serfdom, Habsburg troops had been held in check by the Turks.
By the turn of the 17th century, the House of Austria had registered moderate gains in its State-construction; but the political unity of its possessions was still very tenuous. Dynastic rule was on a different legal footing in each of them, and no common institutions apart from the War Council linked them together. The Austrian lands themselves were only first declared indivisible in 1602. The Imperial aspirations of Habsburg rulers were no substitute for practical integration of the territories owing allegiance to them: Hungary lay outside the Reich anyway, so there was not even an inclusive relationship between the realm of the Empire and the lands of the Emperor. Moreover, in the later half of the 16th century, latent opposition in the various aristocratic Estates in the Habsburg domains had been given a new and sharp edge by the advent of the Reformation. For while the dynasty remained a pillar of the Roman Church and Tridentine orthodoxy, the majority of the nobility in every one of its constituent lands went over to Protestantism. First the bulk of the Czech landowning class, long habituated to local heresy, became Lutheran, then the Magyar gentry adopted Calvinism, and finally the Austrian aristocracy itself, in the heartland of Habsburg power, was won to the Reformed religion. By the 1570s the greatest noble families in the Erblande were Protestant: Dietrichstein, Starhemberg, Khevenhiiller, Zinzendorf.9 This minatory development was a sure sign of deeper conflicts to come. The impending accession of Ferdinand II to power in Vienna in 1617 thus set off more than a local explosion: Europe was soon engulfed in the Thirty Years’ War. For Ferdinand, trained by Bavarian Jesuits, had been a grim and effective champion of the Counter-Reformation as Duke of Styria from 1595 onwards: unrelenting administrative centralization and religious repression were the hallmarks of his provincial regime in Graz. Spanish Absolutism was the international sponsor of his candidature, within the Habsburg family, to the dynastic succession in the Empire and Bohemia; truculent Hispanic diplomats and generals guided his court from the start. The Bohemian Estates, nervous and erratic, accepted Ferdinand as monarch, and then at the first departure from religious toleration in the Czech lands, raised the banner of rebellion.
The Defenestration of Prague opened the greatest crisis of the Habsburg State system in Central Europe. Dynastic authority collapsed in Bohemia itself; more dangerously still, the Austrian and Hungarian Estates started to veer towards compacts of sympathy with the Bohemian Estates, conjuring up the spectre of a general nobiliary mutiny, fired by smouldering particularism and protestantism. In this emergency, the Habsburg cause was saved by the operation of two decisive factors. The Czech aristocracy, after the historic suppression of the popular Hussite movements in Bohemia, was unable to rally any profound social enthusiasm among the rural or urban masses for its revolt; some two-thirds of the population was Protestant, but at no point did religious zeal serve to cement an inter-class bloc against Austrian counter-attack, of the type which had marked the Dutch struggle against Spain. The Bohemian Estates were socially and politically isolated: the House of Austria was not. The militant solidarity of Madrid with Vienna turned the tide, as Spanish arms, allies and money were mobilized to crush Czech secessionism, effectively organizing Ferdinand II’s whole war effort.10 The result was the Battle of the White Mountain, which destroyed the old Bohemian noble class. The next decade saw Imperial armies led by Wallenstein marching victoriously to the Baltic, extending Habsburg power into North Germany for the first time, and dangling the possibility of a renovated, centralized German Empire ruled by the House of Austria. Swedish intervention in the 1630’s destroyed this ambition; the aggressive impetus of Habsburg Imperial policy was lost forever. The Peace of Westphalia which ended the Thirty Years’ War consecrated the verdict of the military struggle. The House of Austria was not to dominate the Empire; but it had achieved mastery of Bohemia, the original stake of the conflict. The whole internal pattern of Habsburg power within the dynastic lands of Danubian Europe was set by the consequences of this settlement.
By its victory in Bohemia, the Hofburg had achieved an enormous domestic advance towards Absolutism. In 1627, Ferdinand II had promulgated a new Constitution for the conquered Bohemian lands. The Verneuerte Landesordnung made Habsburg rule into a hereditary monarchy, no longer subject to election; converted all local officials into regal agents; made Catholicism the sole religion and restored the clergy to the Estates; invested the dynasty with supreme judicial rights; and elevated German to the rank of an official language equal to Czech.11 The Snem was not abolished, and the necessity of its consent to taxation was reaffirmed. But in practice its survival proved no barrier to the implantation of Absolutism in Bohemia. The local assemblies which had once been the pulse of landowner politics faded away in the 1620’s, while participation in the Estates declined steeply, as the Snem lost political significance. This process was facilitated by the dramatic war-time upheaval in the social composition and role of the nobility itself. The military reconquest of Bohemia had been accompanied by the political proscription of the bulk of the old seigneurial class, and the economic expropriation of its estates. Over half the manors in Bohemia were confiscated after 1620;12 this vast agrarian booty was distributed to a new, motley aristocracy of fortune, expatriate captains and emigrant bravos of the Counter-Reformation. No more than a fifth or an eighth of the nobility in the later 17th century was Old German or Old Czech in origin: only some eight or nine major Czech lines, which had remained loyal to the dynasty for religious reasons, survived into the new order.13 The great majority of the Bohemian aristocracy was now of foreign origin, mixing Italians (Piccolomini), Germans (Schwarzenberg), Austrians (Trautmansdorff), Slovenes (Auersperg), Walloons (Bucquoy), Lorrainers (Desfours) or Irish (Taaffe). Landed property by the same stroke underwent a notable concentration: lords and clergy controlled nearly three-quarters of all land, while the share of the former small gentry tumbled from one-third to one-tenth. The lot of the peasantry correspondingly worsened. Already tied to the soil and thinned by the war, it was now loaded with increased labour services; the average robot obligations came to be 3 days a week, while more than a quarter of serfs worked every day except Sundays and saints’ days for their lords.14 Moreover, whereas prior to the Thirty Years’ War, Bohemian landowners – unlike their Polish or Hungarian counterparts – had paid taxes together with their villeins, after 1648 the new, cosmopolitan nobility in practice achieved fiscal immunity, shifting virtually the whole tax burden downwards onto their serfs. This transfer naturally smoothed the course of deliberations between monarchy and aristocracy in the Estates: henceforward the dynasty merely requested lump sums from the Estates, leaving them to fix and collect the taxes to meet its demands. Fiscal pressures could easily be augmented under this system, where larger budgets usually meant that the Estates ‘simply agreed to increase the charges which they themselves laid on their tenants and subjects’.15 Bohemia had always been much most lucrative domain of the Habsburg lands, and the new financial grip of the monarchy over it significantly strengthened Viennese Absolutism.
Meanwhile, in the Erblande themselves, centralized and autocratic administration had made considerable progress. Ferdinand II had created the Austrian Court Chancellery – an enlarged version of his chosen instrument of power in Styria – to top the machinery of government in the Archduchy. This body gradually achieved ascendancy within the counsels of the State, at the expense of the Imperial Privy Council, whose importance inevitably receded after the reluctant withdrawal of Habsburg power from Germany. More vitally still, a permanent army of some 50,000 – 10 infantry and 9 cavalry regiments – was created for the first time in 1650, in the aftermath of Westphalia: the conduct of the Austrian and Bohemian Estates was henceforward inevitably tempered by the presence of this weapon. At the same time, Habsburg Absolutism achieved a unique cultural and ideological feat: Bohemia, Austria and Hungary – the three constitutive zones of its rule – were all progressively folded back into the Church of Rome. Protestantism had been repressed in Styria in the 1590’s; the Reformed religions were banned in Lower Austria in 1625, in Bohemia in 1627, and in Upper Austria in 1628. In Hungary, an authoritarian solution was impossible, but the Magyar Primates Pázmany and Lippay successfully reconverted most of the Hungarian magnate class. Austrian lords and peasants, Bohemian towns and Hungarian landowners alike were eventually recatholicized by the skill and drive of the Counter-Reformation, under the auspices of the Habsburg dynasty: a record without equal anywhere else in the continent. The crusading vigour of Danubian Catholicism appeared to find its apotheosis with the triumphant relief of Vienna from the Turks in 1683, and the subsequent victories which cleared Ottoman power out of Hungary and Transylvania, recovering long-lost territories for Christendom and expanding Habsburg rule impressively to the East. The military establishment which achieved these gains, now considerably enlarged, proved equally able to play a major role in the Alliance which held off Bourbon progress on the Rhine. The War of the Spanish Succession demonstrated the new international weight of the House of Austria. The Peace of Utrecht endowed it with Belgium and Lombardy.
Yet the peak of Austrian power, suddenly reached, was soon passed. No other European Absolutism had quite such a brief phase of military confidence and initiative. Begun in 1683, it was over by 1718, with the short capture of Belgrade and the Peace of Passarowitz. Thereafter Austria can virtually be said never to have won a war with a rival state again.16 An unending series of defeats extended dismally down the next two centuries, relieved only by inglorious participation in the victories of others. This external atony was an index of the internal impasse and incompletion of Austrian Absolutism, even at the height of its powers. The most imposing and distinctive achievements of Habsburg rule in Central Europe were its gathering of disparate lands under a single dynastic roof, and its reconversion of them to Catholicism. Yet the ideological and diplomatic triumphs of the House of Austria – its feline religious and marital flair – were also substitutes for more substantial bureaucratic and military gains. The influence of the Jesuits at the Court of Vienna during the epoch of the Counter-Reformation was always far greater than at the sister court of Madrid, where Catholic fervour was typically combined with watchful anti-Papalism. Clerical advisers and agents permeated the whole Habsburg administrative system in Central Europe during the 17th century, performing many of the most crucial political tasks of the day: the construction of the Tridentine bastion in Styria under Ferdinand II – in many ways the pilot experience for Austrian Absolutism – was largely their work. Likewise, the recovery of the Magyar magnate class for the Roman faith – without which the ultimate maintenance of Habsburg suzerainty over Hungary would probably have been impossible – was accomplished by the patient and adroit ideological missions of the priesthood. But such a success also had its limits. Catholic universities and schools won back the Hungarian nobility from Protestantism – but by carefully respecting and upholding the traditional corporate privileges of the Magyar ‘nation’, assuring the Church spiritual control but leaving the State encumbered with awkward impediments. Habsburg reliance on the clergy in internal political affairs thus had its price: no matter how astute, priests could never be functionally equivalent to officiers or pomeshchiki as building-blocks of Absolutism. Vienna was not to become a metropolitan centre of sale of offices, or of a service nobility; its hallmarks remained a malleable clericalism and a jumbled administration.
Similarly, the extraordinary fortune of the dynastic marriage policy of the Habsburg dynasty always tended to outrun its martial capacity, without ultimately compensating for it. The nuptial facility with which Hungary or Bohemia were initially acquired led to the coercive difficulty of enforcing Austrian centralism in the one and the eventual impossibility of imposing it in the other: diplomacy could not replace armaments, in the last resort. Yet the military record of Austrian Absolutism was also always somewhat defective and anomalous. The dynasty’s three greatest successes were the initial acquisition of Bohemia and Hungary in 1526, the subjugation of Bohemia in 1620 and the defeat of the Turks in 1683, resulting in the reconquest of Hungary and Transylvania. Yet the first was the negative fruit of the Jagiellon defeat at Mohacs, not the product of any Habsburg victory: the Turks won the first and most important battle of Austrian Absolutism for it. The White Mountain, too, was to a large extent a Bavarian victory of the Catholic League; while the troops mustered under the Imperial command itself included Italian, Walloon, Flemish and Spanish contingents.17 Even the relief of Vienna itself was essentially achieved by Polish and German armies, after the Emperor Leopold I had hastily quitted his capital: Habsburg troops numbered only a sixth of the force that won Sobieski fame in 1683.18
This recurrent reliance on allied arms had its curious complement in Austrian generalship itself. For most of the major military commanders who served the House of Austria down to the 19th century were independent entrepreneurs or foreign soldiers of fortune: Wallenstein, Piccolomini, Montecuccoli, Eugene, Laudun, Dorn. Wallenstein’s host was in comparative terms perhaps the most formidable ever to fly the Austrian colours; yet it was in fact a private military machine created by its Czech general, which the dynasty hired but did not control – hence Wallenstein’s assassination. Eugene, by contrast, was completely loyal to Vienna, but a Savoyard without any roots in the Habsburg lands themselves: the Italian Montecuccoli and the Rhinelander Dorn were lesser versions of the same pattern. The constant use of foreign mercenaries was, of course, a normal and universal feature of Absolutism: but these were rank-and-file troops, not officers in overall command of the armed forces of the State. The latter were naturally recruited from the ruling class of the lands concerned – the local nobility. In the Habsburg domains, however, there was no single seigneurial class, but a number of territorially distinct landowning groups. It was this lack of a unified aristocracy which told on the whole fighting capacity of the Habsburg State. Feudal nobilities, as we have seen, were never primarily ‘national’ in character; they could be transposed from one country to another, and fulfill their role as a landowning class without necessarily possessing any common ethnic or linguistic links with the subject population beneath them. The cultural separation of a language barrier might often be preserved to heighten the natural distance between rulers and ruled. On the other hand, ethnic or linguistic heterogeneity within the landed aristocracy of a single feudal polity was usually a source of potential weakness and disintegration, for it tended to undermine the political solidarity of the dominant class itself. The disarranged and haphazard aspects of the Habsburg State undoubtedly derived very largely from the composite and unreconciled character of its constituent nobilities. The drawbacks of aristocratic diversity were thus predictably evident in the most sensitive sector of the State machine, the Army. In the absence of a socially unitary nobility, Habsburg armies rarely attained the performance of their Hohenzollern or Romanov counterparts.
Thus Austrian Absolutism, even at its apogee, lacked structural congruence and certainty, because of the conglomerate character of the social formations over which its rule was exercised. The Germanic lands of Austria proper always represented the reliable inner core of the Habsburg Empire – the oldest and most loyal possessions of the dynasty in Central Europe. Nobles and towns retained many traditional privileges in the Landtage of Lower and Upper Austria, Styria and Carinthia; in the Tyrol and Vorarlberg, the peasantry itself was actually represented in the Estates, exceptional sign of the Alpine character of these provinces. The ‘intermediate’ institutions inherited from the mediaeval epoch were never suppressed, as in Prussia: but by the early 17th century they had been rendered obedient instruments of Habsburg power, whose survival was never seriously to obstruct the will of the dynasty. The Archducal lands thus formed the secure, central base of the ruling House. Unfortunately, they were too modest and circumscribed to impart a unitary royal dynamism to the Habsburg State as a whole. Economically and demographically, they were outweighed by the richer Bohemian lands already in the mid 16th century: in 1541, Austrian tax contributions to the Imperial Treasury were only half those of Bohemia, and this ratio of 1:2 remained in force down to the end of the 18th century.19 The Swedish defeat of Wallenstein’s armies during the Thirty Years’ War blocked any expansion of the Germanic base of the dynasty, effectively isolating the Archduchy from the traditional Reich. Moreover, rural society in Austria was least representative of the dominant agrarian pattern in the Habsburg lands. For the semi-mountainous character of much of the region rendered it ungrateful terrain for large feudal estates. The result was the persistence of small peasant property in the highland zones, and the prevalence of the Western type of Grundhcrrschaft on the plains, stiffened by Eastern norms of exploitation;20 patrimonial jurisdictions and feudal dues were general, labour services were heavy in many parts, but the opportunities for consolidated demesne farming and vast latifundia were comparatively limited. The solvent action of the capital city on the labour force of the surrounding countryside was later to become a further deterrent to the emergence of a Gutsherrschaft economy.21 The ‘critical mass’ of the Austrian aristocracy itself was thus too slight to produce an effective magnetic centre for the whole landowning class of the Empire.
The crushing of the Bohemian Estates during the Thirty Years’ War, on the other hand, gave Habsburg Absolutism its most basic political success; the substantial and fertile Czech lands now lay unequivocally within its grasp. No rebellious nobility in Europe met such a summary fate as the Bohemian aristocracy: after its downfall, a new landowning class, owing everything to the dynasty, was planted on its estates. The history of European Absolutism reveals no comparable episode. Yet there was still a revealing peculiarity in the Habsburg settlement of Bohemia. The new nobility created there by it was not principally composed of houses from the Austrian bulwark of the dynasty; apart from a few Catholic Czech families, it was imported from abroad. The extraneous origins of this stratum indicated the lack of a home aristocracy to transfer to Bohemia – enhancing Habsburg power in the Czech zone in the short-run, a symptom of weakness in the long-run. The Bohemian lands were the wealthiest and most densely populated in Central Europe: for the next century or so, the largest magnates of the Habsburg Empire nearly always possessed huge serf-tilled estates in Bohemia or Moravia, and the economic centre of gravity of the governing class shifted correspondingly northwards. But the new Bohemian aristocracy revealed little esprit de corps or even notable fidelity to the dynasty: the bulk of it deserted at a blow to the Bavarian occupier during the War of the Austrian Succession in the 1740’s. This class was the nearest equivalent to a service nobility in the State system of Austrian Absolutism; but it was the arbitrary product of past services rather than the bearer of organic and ongoing public functions, and although it provided many of the administrative cadres of the Habsburg monarchy, it failed to become a dominant or organizing force within it.
Nevertheless, whatever the limitations of the landowning classes in each sector, the consolidation of imperial power in both the Austrian and Bohemian units of the Habsburg domains by the mid-17th century seemed to create the premises for a more homogeneous, centralized Absolutism. It was to be Hungary which proved the insurmountable obstacle to a unitary royal state. If an analogy were to be made between the two Habsburg Empires, centred in Madrid and Vienna, in which Austria might be compared to Castile and Bohemia to Andalusia, Hungary was a sort of Eastern Aragon. The comparison is very imperfect, however, for Austria never possessed the economic and demographic predominance of Castile, as the hub of the imperial system, while the power and privileges of the Hungarian nobility exceeded even those of the Aragonese aristocracy: and the critical unifying trait of a common language was always missing. The Magyar landowning class was extremely numerous, some 5–7 per cent of the total population of Hungary. While many of these were ‘moccasin’ squires with tiny plots, the critical sector of the Hungarian gentry was the stratum of so-called bene possessionatiy who owned medium-sized properties and dominated the political life of the provinces:22 it was they who characteristically gave to the Magyar nobility as a whole social leadership and unity. The Hungarian Estates system was fully operative, and had never conceded serious regalian rights to the Habsburg dynasty, which reigned merely by virtue of a ‘personal union’ in Hungary and whose authority was elective and revocable there; the feudal constitution expressly included a jus resistendi legitimating noble uprisings against any royal encroachments on the hallowed liberties of the Magyar ‘nation’. The gentry had controlled its own unit of county administration – the comitatus – ever since the later Middle Ages, assemblies whose permanent committees, vested with judicial, financial and bureaucratic functions, were all-powerful in the countryside and ensured a high degree of political cohesion in the landowning class. The Habsburgs had generally tried to divide the Hungarian aristocracy by splitting away its wealthiest section with honours and privileges: they thus introduced titles – hitherto unknown in Hungary as in Poland – in the 16th century, and secured a juridical separation of the magnates from the gentry in the early 17th century.23 These tactics had not made appreciable inroads against Hungarian particularism, now further fortified by the spread of Protestantism. Above all, the proximity of Turkish military power – the occupying and suzerain force in two-thirds of the Magyar lands after Mohacs – was a decisive objective hindrance to the extension of a centralized Austrian Absolutism into Hungary. For throughout the 16th and 17th centuries, there were Magyar noblemen living directly under Turkish rule in Central Hungary; while further to the East, Transylvania formed an autonomous princely state under local Hungarian rulers, many of them Calvinist, within the Ottoman Empire. Any attempt by Vienna to attack the venerable prerogatives of the Hungarian aristocracy could thus always be countered by resort to alliance with the Turks; while ambitious Transylvanian rulers repeatedly tried to foment their compatriots in Habsburg terrain against the Hof burg in their own interests, frequently with a well-trained army at their disposal and with the goal of creating a greater Transylvania. The tenacity of Magyar particularism was thus also a function of its potent backstops across the Ottoman frontier, which again and again allowed the gentry of ‘Christian’ Hungary to summon to their aid military forces superior to their own local strength.
The 17th century – the great epoch of noble unrest and strain in the West, with its cortege of aristocratic conspiracies and rebellions – thus also witnessed one uniquely persistent and successful seigneurial resistance to increased monarchical power in the East, within a developing Absolutism. The first major round of the struggle occurred during the Thirteen Years’ Austro-Ottoman War. Habsburg military advances against the Turks were accompanied by religious persecution and administrative centralization in the conquered zones. In 1604 the Calvinist magnate Bocskay revolted, rallying Magyar gentry and haiduk free-booters of the borderlands against the imperial occupation forces, in alliance with the Turks; in 1606 the Porte secured an advantageous peace, the Hungarian aristocracy religious toleration from Vienna, and Bocskay the princedom of Transylvania. In 1619–20, the new Transylvanian ruler Gábor Bethlen profited by the Bohemian rising to invade and seize large tracts of Habsburg Hungary, joined by local Protestant landowners. In 1670, Leopold I stamped out a magnate conspiracy and moved troops into Hungary in force: the old constitution was liquidated and a new, centralist administration under a German lieutenant-governor, decked with extraordinary tribunals for repression, was imposed. Fighting soon broke out, led by Count Imre Tökölli, from 1678 onwards; and in 1681, Leopold had to retract his constitutional coup and reaffirm traditional Magyar privileges, as Tökölli beckoned Turkish assistance. Ottoman armies duly arrived and the famous siege of Vienna ensued in 1683. Eventually, Turkish forces were expelled from Hungary altogether in 1687, and Tökölli fled to exile. Leopold was not strong enough to restore the former centralist regime of the Gubernium but was now able to secure from the Magyar Estates at Bratislava the acceptance of the Habsburg dynasty as a hereditary-no longer elective-monarchy in Hungary, and the abrogation of the jus resistendi. The Austrian conquest of Transylvania in 1690–1, moreover, henceforward surrounded the Magyar gentry with a strategic block of territory to its rear, directly subject to Vienna; the Special Military Border Zones subject to the Hofkriegsrat now extended from the Adriatic to the Carpathians; while Turkish power in the Danubian basin was largely spent by the early 18th century. The newly acquired lands were distributed to foreign military adventurers and a select circle of Hungarian lords, whose political loyalty was now cemented by enormous estates in the East.
Nevertheless, the first opportunity for armed sedition afforded by an international conflict was once more avidly seized by the Hungarian gentry. In 1703, war-taxes and confessional persecution drove the north-western peasantry into revolt; capitalizing on this popular unrest, the magnate Ferenc Rakóczi led a final, formidable rebellion in military alliance with France and Bavaria, whose pincer attack on Vienna was only just stopped by the Battle of Blenheim. Habsburg troops had brought the insurrection to an end by 1711; and four years later, the Magyar landowning class for the first time had to accept imperial taxation of its serfs, and army cantonments in its counties, while the military frontiers beyond them were managed by the Hofkriegsrat. A Hungarian Chancellery was now stationed in Vienna. But by the Peace of Szatmár, the traditional social and political privileges of the Hungarian landowners were otherwise confirmed: the administration of the country remained substantially in its control.24 There were no more rebellions after this settlement, for another 150 years; but the relationship joining the Magyar nobility to the Habsburg dynasty remained unlike that between any other Eastern aristocracy and monarchy in the age of Absolutism. Extreme aristocratic decentralization, entrenched in mediaeval laws and institutions, had proved irreducible on the puszta. The Austrian base of the imperial system was too small, the Bohemian extension too brittle, the resistance of the Hungarian polity too strong, for a typically Easternized Absolutism to emerge along the Danube. The result was to block any final rigour or uniformity in the composite state structures presided over by the Hofburg.
Within twenty years of the Peace of Passarowitz, high water-mark of its Balkan expansion and European prestige, Habsburg Absolutism suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of its far smaller Hohenzollern rival. The Prussian conquest of Silesia in the War of the Austrian Succession deprived it of the most prosperous and industrialized province of its Central European empire: Breslau had become the premier commercial centre of the traditional dynastic lands. Control of the Imperial office was temporarily lost to Bavaria, and the bulk of the Bohemian aristocracy defected to the new Bavarian Emperor. Bohemia was eventually recovered; but in the next decade Austrian Absolutism was profoundly shaken again by the Seven Years’ War, in which despite alliance with Russia and France, overwhelming numerical superiority and immense losses, it failed to regain Silesia. Prussia, with a third of the treasury and a sixth of the population of Austria, had twice triumphed over it. This double shock precipitated two drastic bouts of reforms within the Habsburg State under Maria Theresa, conducted by the Chancellors Haugwitz and Kaunitz, with the aim of modernizing and renovating the whole apparatus of government.25 The Bohemian and Austrian Chancelleries were fused into a single organ, the corresponding appellate courts were merged, and the separate legal order of the Bohemian nobility abolished altogether. Taxes were for the first time imposed on the aristocracy and clergy of both lands (but not in Hungary), and their Estates coerced into decennial grants of revenue to raise an enlarged permanent army of 100,000. The Hofkriegsrat was reorganized and given plenary powers throughout the Empire. A supreme State Council was created to integrate and direct the machinery of Absolutism. Permanent royal officials – the kreishauptmanner – were posted into every ‘circle’ of Bohemia and Austria, to enforce centralized justice and administration. Customs barriers between Bohemia and Austria were abolished, and protectionist tariffs erected against foreign imports. Labour services performed by the peasantry were legally limited. Regalian fiscal rights were ruthlessly exploited to increase imperial revenues. Organized emigration was mounted to colonize Transylvania and the Banat. These Theresan measures were soon overtaken, however, by the sweeping programme of further reforms imposed by Joseph II.
The new Emperor broke spectacularly with the Austrian tradition of suffuse official clericalism. Religious toleration was proclaimed, church lands were dissolved, monasteries cut down, church services regulated, and universities taken over by the State. An advanced penal code was introduced, the law courts reformed and censorship abolished. Secular education was vigorously promoted by the State, until by the end of the reign perhaps one out of every three children was in elementary school. Modernized curricula were designed to produce better trained engineers and functionaries. The civil service was professionalized, and its ranks organized on a merit basis, while secret surveillance of it was ensured by a network of police agents modelled on the Prussian system. Taxation ceased to be administered by the Estates, and was henceforward collected directly by the monarchy. Fiscal burdens were steadily increased. Annual sessions of the Estates were suppressed: the Landtage now only assembled at the summons of the dynasty. Conscription was inaugurated, and the army expanded to some 300,000 troops.26 Tariffs were relentlessly raised to assure command of the domestic market, while at the same time urban guilds and corporations were struck down to further free competition within the Empire. The transport system was improved. These steps were radical but not yet outside the range of the conventional moves of Absolutist States in the Age of the Enlightenment. The Josephine programme, however, did not stop at this. In a series of decrees unique in the history of Absolutist Monarchy, serfdom was formally abolished in 1781 – after serious peasant risings in Bohemia during the previous decade – and all subjects were guaranteed the right of free choice in their marriage, migration, work, occupation, and property. Peasants were given security of tenure where they did not possess it, and nobles forbidden to acquire peasant plots. Finally, all labour services were abolished for peasants on ‘rustical’ land (i.e. villein plots) paying two florins or more a year in taxes, fiscal rates were equalized, and official norms for the distribution of the gross agricultural output of these tenants were decreed – 12.2 per cent for the State in taxes, 17.8 per cent for the lords and clergy in rents and tithes, and 70 per cent to be retained by the peasant himself. Although very partial in its coverage – little more than one-fifth of the Bohemian peasantry was affected by it27 – this last measure threatened drastic changes in social relations in the countryside, and struck directly at vital economic interests of the landowning nobility throughout the Empire. The proportion of the agrarian product at the disposal of the direct producer was generally about 30 per cent at the time28 – the new law would double this, by the same stroke all but halving the surplus extracted by the feudal class. Aristocratic outcry was vociferous and universal, backed by widespread obstruction and evasion.
Meanwhile, Joseph II’s centralism was causing political uproar at the two extremities of the Empire. The urban corporations and mediaeval charters of the distant Belgian provinces had been overridden from Vienna; bruised clerical sentiment, patrician hostility and popular patriotism combined to produce an armed revolt concurrent with the French Revolution. More menacing still were the tremors in Hungary. For Joseph II had also been the first Habsburg ruler forcibly to integrate Hungary into a unitary imperial framework. Eugene of Savoy had urged the dynasty to make of their disparate lands an organized whole – ein Totum: this ideal was now at last methodically implemented. All the main Josephine reforms – ecclesiastical, social, economic and military – were enforced in Hungary, over the protests of the Magyar gentry. The Kreis bureaucracy was extended to Hungary and the ancient county system subordinated to it; the fiscal immunity of the landowning class was abolished; royal justice was imposed. The Hungarian Estates were visibly preparing an insurrection by 1789. At the same time, the foreign policy of the monarchy was foundering. Joseph II had twice made efforts to acquire Bavaria, the second time proposing to swap it for Belgium: this logical and rational objective, whose attainment would have transformed the strategic position and inner structure of the Austrian Empire, shifting it decisively back westwards into Germany, was blocked by Prussia. Significantly, Austria was unable to risk war with Prussia over the issue, even after its great military build-up under Joseph. The result was to divert Austrian expansionism into the Balkans again, where Ottoman armies now inflicted a series of reverses on the Emperor. The ultimate goal of the entire strenuous overhaul of Austrian Absolutism – the recovery of its international military rank – thus escaped it. Joseph’s reign ended in disillusionment and failure. War taxes and conscription were unpopular with the peasantry, inflation created great hardships in the towns, censorship was reimposed.29 Most conclusively, relations between monarchy and aristocracy had reached breaking-point. To avert rebellion in Hungary, centralization had to be jettisoned there. Joseph IPs death was the signal for a rapid and general seigneurial reaction. His successor Leopold II was immediately forced to rescind the Land Laws of 1789, and restore the political powers of the Magyar nobility. The Hungarian Estates legally annulled Joseph’s reforms, and ended taxation of noble land. The onset of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars henceforward drove the dynasty and aristocracy together throughout the Empire, clinching them in a common conservatism. The singular episode of a too ‘enlightened’ despotism was over.
Paradoxically, it was the very aporia of Austrian Absolutism that had made it possible. The great weakness and limitation of the Habsburg Empire was its lack of any unitary aristocracy, to form a full service nobility of the Eastern type. Yet it was precisely this social absence which permitted the ‘irresponsible’ latitude of the Josephine autocracy. Just because the landowning class was not built into the Austrian State apparatus in the way that it was in Prussia or Russia, the Absolute Monarchy could sponsor a programme effectively injurious to it. Unrooted in any one territorial nobility, with a strong and single class cohesion, the monarchy could achieve a degree of volatile autonomy unknown to its neighbours. Hence the uniquely ‘anti-feudal’ character of the Josephine decrees, by contrast with the comparable later reforms of the other Eastern Absolutisms.30 The instrument of royal renovation in the Habsburg Empire was likewise a bureaucracy more distinct from the aristocracy than any other in the region: recruited primarily from the German upper-middle class of the towns, culturally and socially separate from the landowning class. But the relative detachment of the monarchy from the heterogeneous landowners of its realm was also, of course, the cause of its inner debility. Internationally, the Josephine programme ended in debacle. Internally, the social laws of nature of the Absolutist State rigorously reasserted themselves, in an eloquent demonstration of the impotence of the personal will of the ruler, once it transgressed the collective interests of the class which Absolutism historically functioned to defend.
The Austrian Empire thus emerged from the Napoleonic era as the central pillar of European reaction, Metternich the doyen of monarchist and clerical counter-revolution throughout the continent. Habsburg Absolutism drifted sluggishly through the first half of the nineteenth century. Meanwhile, incipient industrialization was creating a new urban population, both working-class and middle-class, and commercial agriculture was spreading from the West, with the arrival of new crops – sugar-beet, potatoes, clover – and the growth of wool production. The peasantry had been emancipated from serfdom: but it was still subject to the patrimonial jurisdiction of its landlords throughout the Empire, and nearly everywhere owed heavy labour services to the nobility. In these respects, Erbuntertänigkeit of a traditional type still prevailed over some 80 per cent of its territory, including all the main regions of Central Europe – Upper Austria, Lower Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Bohemia, Moravia, Galicia, Hungary and Transylvania – and the robot remained the main source of labour in the agrarian economy.31 The typical German or Slav peasant still kept only some 30 per cent of his produce, after payment of taxes and dues, in the 1840’s.32 At the same time, increasing numbers of landowners were becoming aware that the average productivity of hired labour was much greater than that of robot labour, and were seeking to switch to it; a shift of attitude statistically illustrated by their willingness to accept monetary commutation of the robot at rates well below the minimum wages for equivalent hired labour.33 Increasing numbers of landless peasants were simultaneously migrating to the towns, where many of them became urban unemployed. National consciousness was inevitably now aroused, in the post-Napoleonic epoch, first in the cities and later washing back into the countryside. Bourgeois political demands were soon more national than liberal: the Austrian Empire became the ‘prison of peoples’.
These accumulated contradictions fused and exploded in the revolutions of 1848. The dynasty eventually quelled urban riots and suppressed national risings throughout its lands. But the peasant revolts that had given the revolutions their mass force could only be pacified by granting the basic demands of the villages. The Assembly of 1848 performed this service for the monarchy, before it was cashiered by the victory of the counter-revolution. Seigneurial jurisdictions were lifted, the rustical-dominical division of land was eliminated, all tenants given equal security of tenure, and feudal dues in labour, kind or cash were formally abolished – with indemnification for lords, of which half was to be paid by the tenant and half by the State. The Austrian and Bohemian landowning class, already instructed in the benefits of free labour, did not oppose this settlement: its interests were generously secured by the compensation clauses, passed against the resistance of peasant spokesmen.34 The Magyar Estates, led by Kossuth, ended the robot in an even more advantageous manner for the gentry: compensation in Hungary was integrally paid by the peasantry. The Agrarian Law of September 1848 assured the predominance of capitalist relations in the countryside. Landed property became even more concentrated, as smaller gentry sold out and poor peasants flocked to the towns, while the great noble magnates increased their latifundia and rationalized their management and production with compensation funds. A stratum of well-off Grossbauern was consolidated beneath them, especially in the Austrian lands, but the fundamental distribution of the soil remained perhaps more polarized than ever after the advent of capitalist farming. In the 1860s, 0.16 per cent of landholdings in Bohemia – the huge magnate estates – covered 34 per cent of the land.35
An increasingly capitalist agriculture now underlay the Habsburg polity. The Absolutist State, however, emerged unreconstructed from the ordeal of 1848. Liberal demands for civic freedoms and suffrage were silenced, national aspirations suppressed. The feudal dynastic order had survived the popular ‘springtime’ of Europe. But its capacity for active evolution or adaptation was now past. The Austrian agrarian reforms had been the work of the ephemeral Assembly of the revolution, not the initiative of the royal government – unlike the Prussian Reforms of 1808–11; they had merely been accepted by the Hofburg after the event. Likewise, the military defeat of the most menacing national insurrection in Central Europe – the constitution of a separate State by the Hungarian gentry, to include its own ministry, budget, army and foreign policy, linked to Austria merely by a ‘personal union’ once again – had been accomplished not by Austrian, but by Russian armies: lowering repetition of the traditions of the dynasty. Henceforward, the Habsburg Monarchy was more and more the passive object of events and conflicts abroad. The fragile restoration of 1849 allowed it for a brief decade to achieve the long-envisaged goal of complete administrative centralization. The Bach system imposed a uniform bureaucracy, law, taxation and customs zone throughout the Empire; Hungary was filled with hussars to enforce its submission. But no stabilization of this centralist autocracy was possible: it was too weak internationally. Defeat by France at Solferino and the loss of Lombardy in 1859 shook the monarchy so badly that a domestic political retreat was necessary. The Patent of 1861 conceded an Imperial Parliament or Reichsrat elected indirectly from the provincial Landtage, with four curias, restricted suffrage and loading to ensure Germanic superiority. The Reichsrat had no control over ministers, conscription or collection of existing taxes; it was a powerless and token entity, unaccompanied by any freedom of the press or even immunity for deputies.36 The Magyar gentry refused to accept it, and all-out military rule was reinstituted in Hungary. Defeat by Prussia at Sadowa, once again damaging and enfeebling the monarchy, undid this provisional regime within six years.
The whole traditional structure of the Absolutist State now underwent a sudden and drastic tilt. For over three centuries, the oldest and most formidable enemy of Habsburg centralism had always been the Hungarian nobility – the most obdurately particularist, culturally cohesive and socially repressive landowning class in the Empire. The final expulsion of the Turks from Hungary and Transylvania in the 18th century had, as we have seen, brought Magyar turbulence to an end, for a time. But the next hundred years, while apparently consecrating Hungarian political integration into the Austrian Empire, was in fact preparing an ultimate and spectacular reversal of roles within it. For the reconquest of Ottoman Hungary and Transylvania, and the agrarian reclamation and colonization of the vast spaces in the East, decisively increased the economic weight of the Hungarian ruling class within the Empire as a whole. Peasant emigration had initially been induced to the Central Hungarian Plain by advantageous tenancies; but once it was repopulated, landlord pressures immediately tightened, demesnes were enlarged and peasant plots expropriated.37 The agricultural boom of the Enlightenment epoch had, despite the discriminating tariff policies of Vienna,38 greatly benefited most of the gentry and laid the foundations of magnate fortunes which were to be of unparalleled dimensions. Historically, the Bohemian-based nobility had been much the richest in the Habsburg domains: by the 19th century, this was no longer so. The Schwarzenberg family might own 479,000 acres in Bohemia; the Esterhazy family was master of some 7,000,000 in Hungary.39 The confidence and aggressivity of the Magyar landowning class as a whole, squires and magnates alike, was thus gradually enhanced by the new extent of its possessions and the growth of their importance within the Central European economy.
Yet the Hungarian aristocracy was never admitted to the inner counsels of the Habsburg State in the 18th and early 19th centuries: it was always kept at a distance from the imperial political apparatus itself. Its opposition to Vienna remained the greatest domestic danger to the dynasty: the revolution of 1848 had shown its mettle, when it both imposed a more ruthless agrarian settlement on its peasantry than the Austrian or Bohemian aristocracy were able to do, and resisted royal armies of repression until overwhelmed by the Tsar’s expedition against it. Thus as Austrian Absolutism became steadily weaker, after successive foreign disasters, and popular unrest in the Empire steadily stronger, the dynasty was driven, logically and irresistibly, towards its hereditary foe – the most combative and feudal nobility left in Central Europe, and the only landed class now capable of shoring up its power. The Prussian victory over Austria in 1866 assured the Hungarian rise to dominance within the Empire. To save itself from disintegration, the monarchy accepted a formal partnership. The Dualism which created ‘Austria-Hungary’ in 1867, gave the Magyar landowning class complete domestic power in Hungary, with its own government, budget, assembly and bureaucracy, retaining only a common army and foreign policy, and a renewable customs union. While in Austria, civic equality, freedom of expression and secular education now had to be yielded by the monarchy, in Hungary no such concessions were made by the gentry. The Hungarian nobility henceforward represented the militant and masterful wing of aristocratic reaction in the Empire, which increasingly came to dominate the personnel and policy of the Absolutist apparatus in Vienna itself.40
For in Austria, political parties, social agitation and national conflicts were gradually undermining the viability of autocratic rule. Within four decades, in 1907, manhood suffrage was forced from the dynasty in Austria, amidst urban strikes and popular echoes of the Russian Revolution of 1905. In Hungary, the landowners firmly kept their class monopoly of the franchise. The Austrian Empire thus failed ever to achieve the transmutation which had made the German Empire into a capitalist state. When the First World War broke out, there was still no parliamentary control of the Imperial government, no Prime Minister, no uniform electoral system. The Reichsrat had ‘no influence on policy, and its members had no hope of public careers’.41 Over 40 per cent of the population – the inhabitants of Hungary, Croatia and Transylvania – was excluded from a secret vote or universal male suffrage; the 60 per cent who possessed them in the Austrian lands enjoyed a merely nominal right, since their votes had no purchase on the affairs of the State. Ironically, despite blatant rigging, the nearest to an effective electorate and responsible ministry existed in Hungary – just because both were confined to the landowning class. Above all, of course, the Austrian Empire was the mouldering negation of the bourgeois national state: it represented the antithesis of one of the essential tokens of the capitalist political order in Europe. Its German rival had achieved its structural transformation precisely by presiding over the national construction which the Austrian State refused. The contrary social evolution of each Absolutism thus had its geo-political counterpart. The Prussian State was dragged reluctantly but inexorably towards the West as the 19th century wore on, with the industrialization of the Ruhr and the capitalist development of the Rhineland. The Austrian State in the same epoch shifted in the opposite direction, towards the East, with the growing ascendancy of Hungary and its last-ditch landlordism. Appropriately, the final acquisition of the dynasty formed the most backward territory of all in the Empire – the Balkan provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, annexed in 1909, where the traditional servitude of the local kmet peasants was never seriously modified.42 The outbreak of the First World War took the trajectory of Austrian Absolutism to its conclusion: German armies fought its battles and Hungarian politicians determined its diplomacy. While the Prussian general Mackensen commanded the field, the Magyar leader Tisza ended as effective Chancellor of the Empire. Defeat razed the prison of nationalities to the ground.

1. A. Wandruszka, The House of Habsburg, London 1964, pp. 40–1.
2. W. Martin, A History of Switzerland, London 1931, p. 44.
3. The singular emergence of the plebeian Swiss Confederation within aristocratic and monarchist Europe underlines an important and general characteristic of the feudal polity in the later Middle Ages: the same parcellization of sovereignty which existed at ‘national’ level could also operate at an ‘international’ level, so to speak, permitting anomalous gaps and interstices in the total system of feudal suzerainty. The Italian communes had already demonstrated this at a municipal level, by throwing off Imperial authority. The Swiss cantons achieved the autocephaly of a whole region, by their confederation – an anomaly impossible in any political system other than European feudalism. The Habsburg dynasty did not forgive them for it: four hundred years later, Switzerland was still ‘an asylum of dissolutes and criminals’ for Maria Theresa.
4. H-F. Feine, ‘Die Territorialbildung der Habsburger im deutschen Südwesten’, Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte (Germ. Abt.) LXVII, 1950, pp. 272, 277, 306; the lengthiest recent treatment of the subject.
5. V. S. Mamatey, Rise of the Habsburg Empire 1526–1815, New York 1971, p. 38.
6. H. F. Schwarz, The Imperial Privy Council in the Seventeenth Century, pp. 57–60.
7. See the discussion in G. D. Ramsay, ‘The Austrian Habsburgs and the Empire’, The New Cambridge Modern History, III, pp. 329–30.
8. For an account of the origins of the Grenzers, see Gunther Rothenburg, The Austrian Military Border in Croatia, 1522–1747 Urbana 1960, pp. 29–65. The Grenzers, in addition to their defense role against the Turks, were used as a dynastic weapon against the local Croat nobility, who were always extremely hostile to their presence in the frontier zones.
9. Mamatey, Rise of the Habsburg Empire, p. 40.
10. Ferdinand II himself declared that the Spanish envoy Oňate was ‘the man with whose friendly and frank help all the affairs of the Habsburg family are being managed’. For an account of Oňate’s decisive political role in the crisis, see Bohdan Chudoba, Spain and the Empire 1529–1643, Chicago 1952, pp. 220–8.
11. For the Verneuerte Landesordnung, see R. Kerner, Bohemia in the Eighteenth Century, New York 1932, pp. 17–22.
12. J. Polišensky, The Thirty Years’ War, London 1971, pp. 143–4: the confiscated estates were on average much larger than those which escaped expropriation, so that the actual proportion of land which changed hands was considerably greater than the number of manors themselves.
13. H. G. Schenk, ‘Austria’, in Goodwin (ed.), The European Nobility in the 18th Century, p. 106; Kerner, Bohemia in the Eighteenth Century, pp. 67–71.
14. Polišensky, The Thirty Years’ War, pp. 142, 246; Betts, ‘The Habsburg Lands’, The New Camridge Modern History, V, Cambridge 1969, pp. 480–1.
15. J. Stoye, The Siege of Vienna, London 1964, p. 92.
16. Its campaigns against Piedmont in 1848 were to be the single exception.
17. Chudoba, Spain and the Empire, pp. 247–8.
18. Stoye, The Siege of Vienna, pp. 245, 257.
19. Kerner, Bohemia in the Eighteenth Century,  25–6. The Bohemian realm included Bohemia proper, Moravia and Silesia.
20. V-L. Tapié, Monarchic et Peuples du Danube, Paris 1969, p. 144.
21. For conditions in Lower Austria, see Jerome Blum, Noble Landowners and Agriculture in Austria 1815–1848, Baltimore 1947, pp. 176–80.
22. Bela Király, Hungary in the Late Eighteenth Century, New York 1969, pp. 33, 108. It looks as if the role of the bene possessionati within the Hungarian landowning class was one of the most important factors which distinguished it from the similarly numerous Polish nobility, whom it otherwise so much resembled; the latter were much more polarized between magnates and petty squires, and consequently lacked the cohesion of their Magyar counterparts.
23. Mamatey, Rise of the Habsburg Empire, p. 37.
24. In many ways, the best synoptic comments on the successive Hungarian revolts of this epoch are to be found in McNeill, Europe’s Steppe Frontier, Chicago 1964, pp. 94–7, 147–8, 164–7.
25. Bluche, Le Despotisme Eclairé, pp. 106–10 provides a succinct survey.
26. Conscription was introduced in 1771. In 1788, Joseph II mobilized 245,000 infantry, 37,000 cavalry and 900 cannon for his war against Turkey: H. L. Mikoletzky, Osterreich. Das grosse 18. Jahrhundert, Vienna 1967, pp. 227, 366.
27. Wright, Serf, Seigneur and Sovereign, p. 147.
28. Kerner, Bohemia in the Eighteenth Century, pp. 44–5.
29. The isolation of the regime in its last years is well conveyed by Ernst Wangermann, From Joseph II to the Jacobin Trials, Oxford 1959, pp. 28–9. The peasantry was disappointed with the limits of its land reform and shocked by its anti-clericalism.
30. All three reform programmes – the Austrian, Prussian and Russian – were, of course, motivated by military defeats.
31. Blum, Noble Landowners and Agriculture in Austria, pp. 45, 202.
32. Ibid., p. 71.
33. Ibid., pp. 192–202.
34. Blum provides a trenchant analysis of the settlement, pp. 235–8.
35. Tapié, Monarchie et Peuples du Danube, p. 325.
36. A. J. P. Taylor, The Habsurg Monarchy, London 1952, pp. 104–27.
37. Kiraly, Hungary in the Late Eighteenth Century, pp. 129–35.
38. Emphasized by traditional Hungarian historians: see, for example, H. Marczali, Hungary in the Eighteenth Century, Cambridge 1910, pp. 39, 99.
39. Mamatey, Rise of the Habsburg Empire, p. 64; C. A. Macartney, ‘Hungary’, in Goodwin (ed.), The European Nobility in the 18th Century, p. 129.
40. The major exception was the army, whose supreme command remained a largely Austrian preserve throughout the final period down to the First World War. But the institutional importance of the military establishment in the Austrian State was always, as we have seen, below the average for Absolutism. The General Staff played a fatal role in the crisis of August 1914, but its failures once the fighting had started soon relegated it to a comparative back-seat again (in diametric contrast to the rise of its German counterpart in Berlin), while Magyar political influence in Vienna markedly increased as the War went on.
41. Taylor, The Habsburg Monarchy, p. 199.
42. O. Jászi, The Dissohition of the Habsburg Monarchy, Chicago 1929, pp. 225–6.