12 -- Russia

6
Russia
We now come to the last, and most durable Absolutism in Europe. Tsarism in Russia outlived all its precursors and contemporaries, to become the only Absolutist State in the continent to survive intact into the 20th century. The phases and pauses in the genesis of this State set it apart early on. For the economic downturn which marked the onset of the late feudal crisis occurred, as we have seen, under the shadow of Tartar tutelage. Wars, civil conflicts, plagues, depopulation and abandoned settlements characterized the 14th and first half of the 15th centuries. From 1450 onwards, a new era of economic revival and expansion set in. In the course of the next hundred years, the population multiplied, agriculture prospered, and internal trade and the use of money picked up rapidly, while the territory of the Muscovite State increased over six times in size. The three-field system – hitherto virtually unknown in Russia – started to supersede traditional and wasteful peasant assartage, in conjunction with the dominance of the wooden plough: somewhat later, mills came into general village use.1 There was no export farming, and estates were still largely autarkic, but the presence of sizeable towns controlled by the Grand Duchy provided a certain outlet for manorial production; monastic domains were to the forefront in this trend. Urban manufactures and exchange were assisted by the territorial unification of Muscovy and the standardization of currency. Hired labour in town and country grew notably, while international trade across Russia flourished.2 It was in this phase of upswing that Ivan III laid the first foundations of Russian Absolutism by his inauguration of the pomest’e system.
Hitherto, the Russian landowning class had been essentially composed of autonomous and separatist princes and boyar nobles, many of Tartar or Oriental origin, in possession of large allodial domains and often considerable numbers of slaves. These magnates had gradually gravitated towards the recomposed Muscovite court, where they henceforward formed the entourage of the monarch, while retaining their own military levies and retainers. Ivan Ill’s conquest of Novgorod in 1478 allowed the nascent ducal state to expropriate large tracts of land and settle a new gentry on them, which henceforward formed the military service class of Muscovy. The grant of the pomest’e was conditional on seasonal campaigns in the armies of the ruler, whose legal servitor its holder became, subject to a strictly defined statute. The pomeshchiki were cavalrymen, equipped for archery and sword-thrusts in a disorganized battle mêlée: like the Tartar horsemen whom they were basically designed to confront, they did not use fire-arms. Most of the lands allocated to them were in the centre and south of the country, nearest to the permanent front of war with the Tartars. Whereas the typical boyar votchina was a large domain with an abundant supply of dependent peasant and slave labour (the average in the early 17th century was some 520 households in the Moscow region itself), the gentry pomest’e was usually a small estate with an average of some 5 to 6 peasant households working on it.3 The limited size of the pomeshchik tenures, and the initial rigour of government control over their exploitation of them, probably meant that their productivity was generally well below that of the allodial boyar and monastic lands. Their economic dependence on the Grand Ducal donor of their lands was thus a tight one, which at first left them little margin for social or political initiatives. But already by 1497, it may have been partly their pressure which resulted in Ivan Ill’s Sudebnik decree restricting peasant mobility through Muscovy to two weeks in every year, before and after St George’s Day in November: the first critical step towards the legal enserfment of the Russian peasantry, although the full process had still a considerable distance to go. Vassily III, who succeeded in 1505, followed the same path as his predecessor: Pskov was annexed, and the pomest’e system extended, with its political and military advantages for the dynasty. In some cases, the allodial lands of appanage princes or boyars were taken under control and their owners resettled elsewhere on conditional tenures, owing warrior service to the State. Ivan IV, proclaiming himself Tsar, extended and radicalized this process by outright expropriation of hostile landowners and the creation of a terrorist guard corps (oprichniki), who were granted confiscated estates for their services.
Ivan IV’s work, while a decisive further step towards the construction of a Tsarist autocracy, has often been endowed with undue retrospective coherence. In fact, his rule did mark three critical accomplishments for the future of Russian Absolutism. Tartar power in the East was broken by the liberation of Kazan in 1556, and the annexation of the Khanate of Astrakhan – lifting a secular incubus from the growth of the Muscovite state and society. This signal victory had been preceded by the development of two crucial innovations in the Russian military system – the massive use of heavy artillery and mining charges against fortification (decisive in reducing Kazan), and the formation of the first permanent infantry of strel’tsy musketeers: both of major import for the prospects of foreign expansion. Meanwhile, the pomest’e system was generalized on a new scale, which lastingly shifted the balance of power between the boyars and tsar. The oprichnina confiscations for the first time made conditional tenures the dominant form of landholding in Russia, while votchina estates were simultaneously made liable for service themselves, and the growth of monastic domains was checked. This change was reflected in the diminished role of the Boyar Duma during Ivan IV’s reign, and the summoning of the first Zemsky Sobor or Assembly of the Land, in which the smaller gentry were prominently represented.4 Most important of all, Ivan IV now granted the pomeshchik class the right to determine the level of rents extracted from the peasantry on their lands, and to collect these themselves – thereby making them for the first time masters over the labour-force on their estates.5 At the same time, the administrative and tax system was modernized, by the abolition of the kormlenie provisioning system (in effect, salaries in kind) for provincial officials, and the creation of a central treasury for fiscal receipts. A local network of guba self-administration, manned essentially by the service gentry, further integrated this class into the emergent governmental apparatus of the Russian monarchy. Together, these military, economic and administrative measures tended to strengthen very considerably the political power of the central Tsarist State.
On the other hand, both foreign and domestic advances were subsequently undermined by the disastrous conduct of the interminable Livonian Wars, which exhausted the State and economy, and by the terrorist exactions of the oprichnina at home. The oprichnik ‘state above the state’,6 composed of some 6,000 military police, was entrusted with the administration of Central Russia. Its repressions had no rational objective: they merely answered to Ivan IV’s own semi-insane personal vendettas. It did not threaten the boyars as a class, merely selected individuals among them; while its rampages in the towns, disruption of the land system and super-exploitation of the peasantry was a direct cause of the utter centrifugal collapse of Muscovite society in the last years of Ivan’s reign.7 For at the same time, Ivan had committed a fundamental miscalculation after his victories in the East, by pursuing a policy of Western expansion towards the Baltic, rather than turning South to deal with the Crimean Tartar menace, which constituted a permanent drain on Russian security and stability. Capable of defeating comparatively primitive if ferocious Oriental nomads, the new Russian military forces were unable to match the more advanced Polish and Swedish armies, equipped with Western weapons and tactics The twenty-five year long Livonian War ended in a crushing setback, after wracking Muscovite society with its huge expense and dislocation of the rural economy. Defeats on the front in Livonia combined with demoralization at home under the oprichnik scourge, to precipitate a disastrous exodus of the peasantry of Central and North-Western Russia to the recently acquired periphery of the country, leaving whole regions in desolation behind them. Calamities now succeeded one another in a familiar cycle of fiscal extortions, crop failures, plague epidemics, domestic pillage and foreign invasions. The Tartars plundered Moscow in 1571, and the oprichniki sacked Novgorod. In a desperate attempt to stem this social chaos, Ivan IV banned all peasant movements in 1581, closing the St George’s period for the first time; the decree was expressly an exceptional one, covering a specific year, although it was repeated irregularly later in the decade. These bans were unable to check the immediate problem of mass flights, as great expanses of the traditional Muscovite homelands were laid waste of habitation. In the worst-hit areas, the land cultivated per peasant household sank to a third or a fifth of its previous levels; there was a widespread agrarian regression to extensive fallows; in the province of Moscow itself, it has been estimated that from 76 to 96 per cent of all settlements may have been abandoned.8 Amidst this caving in of the whole rural order laboriously constructed over the past century, there was a sharp recrudesence of slavery, many peasants selling themselves as chattels to escape starvation. The concluding debacle of Ivan IV’s reign was to impair the political and economic progress of Russian feudal society for decades thereafter, corroding even its initial successes.9 The ferocity of Ivan’s rule was a symptom of the hysterical and artificial character of much of his drive towards Absolutism, in conditions where any systematic autocracy was still premature.
The next decade saw some mitigation of the profound economic depression into which Russia had been plunged, but the pomeshchik gentry were still critically short of adequate peasant labour to till their lands, and were now suffering from acute price inflation as well. Boris Godunov, the magnate who had seized power after Ivan’s death, reoriented Russian foreign policy towards peace with Poland in the West, attack on the Crimean Tartars in the South, and above all, annexation of Siberia in the East: for which he needed the loyalty of the military service class. It was against this background that, in order to rally gentry support, Godunov issued a decree in 1592 or 1593 banning all peasant movements until further notice, thereby lifting any temporal restrictions from adscription to the soil. ‘This decree was the culminating point of the policies of enserfment of the late 16th and early 17th centuries.’10 It was promptly followed by a widespread increase in labour services, and legal measures closing entry from lower social groups into the pomeshchik class. Godunov’s elimination of the last heir of the Rurik dynasty, however, abruptly precipitated his downfall. The Russian State now disintegrated into near chaos with the Time of Troubles (1605–13), a delayed-action political sequel to the economic collapse of the 1580’s. Succession intrigues and rival usurpations, magnate conflicts within the boyar class, and foreign invasions from Poland and Sweden, criss-crossed the country. The multiple splits in the ruling order now permitted a Cossack-led peasant rebellion of the type that was to punctuate the next two centuries, Bolotnikov’s insurrection in 1606–7. Led by a runaway slave turned freebooter, a motley popular force drawn from the towns and country-side of the South-West marched on Moscow, attempting to raise the urban poor of the capital against the usurper boyar regime in power. This threat rapidly united mutually hostile gentry and magnate armies against the insurgents, who were eventually defeated at Tula.11 But the first social revolt from below against the growth of seigneurial repression and serfdom was a warning to the landowning classes as a whole of possible storms to come.
By 1613, the aristocracy had closed ranks sufficiently to elect the young boyar Michael Romanov to become Emperor. The advent of the Romanov dynasty, indeed, was now slowly to replant an Absolutism in Russia that was not to be uprooted for 300 years. The central clique of boyar and d’iak functionaries who had secured Michael I’s elevation preserved for a transitional period the Zemsky Sobor which had formally voted it. Energetic recovery of fugitive peasants, including those who had enrolled in the anti-foreign militias of the Time of Troubles, was implemented by the new government in response to gentry demands, as economic production revived. The Patriarch Filaret, Michael’s father, who became the real ruler of the country in 1619, provided further emollients to the pomeshchik class by handing over to it black-earth peasant lands in the North. But the basic character and orientation of the new Romanov regime was magnate, determined by the interests of the metropolitan boyars and venal bureaucrats of the capital, rather than the provincial gentry.12 The 17th century henceforward witnessed a growing divorce and conflict between the mass of the pomeshchik service class – numerically the largest group of Russian landowners, some 25,000 strong – and the Absolutist State, of a type which was common to most European countries in the same epoch, but which assumed peculiar features in the more backward Eastern environment. The small boyar elite of the Russian aristocracy – some 40 to 60 families – was vastly richer than the rank-and-file gentry: it was also highly heterogeneous in character, its original Tartar admixture receiving Polish, Lithuanian, German and Swedish infusions in the course of the 17th century. It enjoyed close links with the top echelons of the central bureaucracy, which were juridically adjacent to it in the complex stratification of ranks in the Muscovite service hierarchy, both groups holding positions well above the gentry itself. It was this magnate-official complex, itself constantly divided by personal or factional feuds, which erratically steered government policies from Moscow in the early Romanov epoch.
Two major contradictions separated it from the service gentry. Firstly, the military superiority of Sweden and Poland – proven in the Livonian Wars and confirmed once again during the Time of Troubles – dictated the renovation and modernization of the Russian Army. The haphazard pomeshchik cavalry, innocent of either concerted discipline or regular fire-power, was an anachronism in the age of the Thirty Years’ War in Europe, as were the demoralized urban strel’tsy: the future lay with trained infantry regiments, used in line formations and equipped with light muskets, combined with picked dragoons. Filaret’s regime therefore started to build up permanent troops of this type, employing foreign officers and mercenaries. The service gentry, however, refused to adapt to the contemporary forms of warfare and join these Western-style regiments, which were first used in the unsuccessful Smolensk War with Poland (1632–4).13 Thereafter, a widening divergence developed between the nominal service role of the pomeshchik class and the actual structure and composition of the Russian armed forces, which came more and more to consist of professional regiments of new-style infantry and cavalry, rather than seasonal levies of mounted gentry. The whole military rationale of the latter was increasingly threatened from the 1630’s onwards, its traditional performance becoming obsolete and redundant. At the same time, there was constant boyar-gentry friction within the landed class as a whole over the disposal of the rural labour-force. For although the Russian peasantry was now legally bound to the soil, flights were still widespread amidst the immense and primitive expanse of the country, with its lack of any clearly denned frontiers in the North, East and South. In practice, larger magnates could lure serfs from the estates of smaller squires to their own latifundia, where agrarian conditions were usually more secure and prosperous, and feudal exactions correspondingly less onerous. The gentry thus clamoured ravenously for the abrogation of all restrictions on the recovery of fugitive peasants, while the magnates manoeuvred successfully to maintain the legal time-limits after which forcible recuperation was no longer possible – ten years after 1615, five years (under increasing pomeshchik pressure) after 1642. The tension between boyars and squires over the anti-fugitive laws was one of the leit-motifs of the epoch, and gentry turbulence in the capital was repeatedly used to extract concessions from the Tsar and higher nobility.14 On the other hand, neither military nor economic conflicts of interest, however temporarily acute, could override the fundamental social unity of the landowning class as a whole against the exploited rural and urban masses. The great popular upheavals from below in the 17th and 18th centuries invariably acted to re-cement the solidarity of the feudal aristocracy above it.15
It was just such a conjuncture which led to the final codification of Russian serfdom. In 1648, tax and price increases provoked violent artisan riots in Moscow, combined with a flare-up of peasant revolts in the provinces, and a mutiny of the strel’tsy. Alarmed by these renewed dangers, the current boyar government accepted a rapid convocation of the decisive Zemsky Sobor which finally lifted all limits on the forcible reclamation of fugitive peasants – thereby conceding the fundamental programme of the provincial gentry, and rallying them to the central State. The Zemsky Sobor now drew up the comprehensive legal code that was to be the social charter of Russian Absolutism. The Sobornoe Ulozhenie of 1649 definitively codified and promulgated the serfdom of the peasantry, which was henceforward bound irreversibly to the soil. Both votchina and pomest’e lands were declared hereditary, and sale or purchase of the latter was banned: all estates were henceforward liable for military service.16 Towns were subjected to tighter controls by the Tsar than ever before, and sealed meticulously off from the rest of the country: their posadskie poor were assimilated to state serfs, only taxpayers could be resident in them, and no inhabitant could leave without royal permission. The top merchant stratum of gosti received monopoly privileges in trade and manufacturing, but in fact the future growth of the towns was choked off by the cessation of rural migration to them with the generalization of adscription, which inevitably created scarcity of labour in the small urban sector of the economy. The similarity of the Russian Uloihenie to the Prussian Recess of four years later needs no emphasis. Both laid the foundations for Absolutism by a compact between monarchy and nobility, in which the political fealty sought by the one was exchanged for the patrimonial serfdom demanded by the other.
The last half of the century revealed the solidity of this union by the very intensity of the political tests to which it was put. The Zemsky Sobor, soon rendered redundant, faded away after 1653. In the next year, the Ukrainian Cossacks formally transferred their allegiance to Russia with the Treaty of Pereyaslavl; the result was the Thirteen Years’ War with Poland. Tsarist troops pushed forward with initial success, taking Smolensk and advancing into Lithuania, where Wilno was captured. The Swedish attack on Poland of 1655 soon complicated the strategic situation, however; Polish recovery led to a decade of cosily fighting, and in the end Russian territorial gains proved limited, if still substantial. By the Treaty of Andrussovo in 1667, the Tsarist State acquired the eastern half of the Ukraine beyond the Dnieper, including Kiev, and recovered the Smolensk region to the north. In the next decade, massive Turkish thrusts into the South from the Black Sea were painfully checked, at the price of making a wilderness of much of the settled Ukraine. These moderate external successes were, meanwhile, accompanied by radical internal changes in the nature of the military apparatus of emergent Russian Absolutism. For it was during this period, as the Estates system waned, that the Army steadily waxed, eventually more than doubling in size from 1630 to 1681, when it numbered 200,000 – up to the levels of the largest Western military establishments of the time.17 The role of the unreconstructed pomeshchik levies declined commensurately. Not only did the new fortified Belgorod line increasingly immunize the Southern frontier from the Crimean Tartar raids against which they had originally been pitted. Above all, semi-permanent ‘new formation’ regiments became the dominant component of Russia’s armies during the Thirteen Years’ War with Poland. By 1674, the gentry provided only two-fifths of the cavalry, itself henceforward strategically outweighed by the hand-gun infantry. Meanwhile, the pomeshchiki were being equally edged out of the civilian administration. Predominant in the central chancelleries during the 16th century, they were increasingly excluded from the bureaucracy in the 17th century, which came to be the preserve of a quasi-hereditary caste of clerks at lower levels, and corrupt high-ranking officials linked to the magnates in its upper reaches.18 In 1679, moreover, the Romanov dynasty abolished the local guba self-administration which had previously been run by provincial squires, integrating it into the central machinery of voevoda governorships, appointed from Moscow.
Nor was the labour situation on the pomeshchik estates very satisfactory. Further laws making peasant flights a criminal felony were passed in 1658, but the continued existence of the Southern borderlands and the Siberian wilds left significant territorial loopholes in the legal consolidation of serfdom, although within the Central regions of the country the debasement of the peasantry became ever more marked: while taxes trebled in the course of the 17th century, the average peasant plot declined by a half from 1550 to 1660, to a mere 4 or 5 acres.19 This relentless constriction of the peasant condition set off the great rural insurrection of cossacks, serfs, suburban poor and slaves in the South-East, led by Razin in 1670 – rallying dispossessed Chuvash, Mari, and Mordva tribesmen, and setting off popular outbreaks in the towns along the Volga valley. The extreme social peril this spreading jacquerie posed to the entire ruling class immediately welded boyars and gentry together: the acute intra-landowner strains of recent decades were forgotten in a common and implacable repression of the poor. The military victory of the Tsarist State over the Razin rebellion, in which the new permanent regiments played an indispensable role, re-bonded the monarchy and nobility once again. In the last two decades of the century, it was the turn of the boyar magnates – hitherto the shifting forces behind successive fainiant tsars – to be curbed and remoulded by the exigencies of an ascendant Absolutism. The great potentates who had emerged from the Time of Troubles were often of mixed provenance and recent origin: they had little reason to cling to the antiquated and divisive hierarchy of the mestnichestvo or labyrinthine ranking system within the boyar families, which dated from the 14th century, and was deleterious to the command system of the new military apparatus of the State. In 1682, the Tsar Theodore ceremoniously burned the venerable books of ancestral precedence that recorded this hierarchy, which was therewith abolished – a precondition of wider aristocratic unity.20 The stage was now set for a drastic reconstruction of the whole political order of Russian Absolutism.
The State machine erected over these new social foundations was above all, of course, the monumental work of Peter I. His first move on acceding to power was to disband the old and unreliable strel’tsy militia in Moscow, whose turbulence had been a frequent source of disquiet to his predecessors, and to create the crack Preobrazhensky and Semenovsky guards regiments which were henceforward the elite corps of the Tsarist repressive apparatus.21 The traditional duality between boyar and gentry sections of the landowning class was recast by the creation of a new and comprehensive ranking system, and the universalization of the service principle, which yoked both nobles and squires back into a single political framework. New titles were imported from Denmark and Prussia (Count, Baron) to introduce more sophisticated and modern scales within the aristocracy, henceforward socially and etymologically derivative en bloc from the court (dvoriantsvo). Independent magnate power was ruthlessly suppressed; the Boyar Duma was eliminated, and succeeded by an appointed Senate. The gentry were reincorporated into a modernized army and administration, of which they once again made up the central personnel.22 The votchina and pomes t’e were united into a single pattern of hereditary landownership, and the nobility soldered to the State by universal service obligations, from the age of 14 onwards, in the army and bureaucracy. To finance the latter institutions, a new census of the population was drawn up, and former slaves were merged with the serf class, while serfs were henceforward bound to the person of their lord rather than to the land which they tilled and could thus be sold like Prussian Leibeigene, by their masters. Formerly free black-earth communities in the North and colonists in Siberia became by the same stroke ‘state serfs’, their conditions somewhat superior to that of private serfs, but increasingly degraded towards it. The Patriarchate was abolished, and the Church firmly subordinated to the State by the new office of the Holy Synod, whose highest official was a secular functionary. A new, occidentalized capital was built at St Petersburg. The administrative system was reorganized into gubernias, provinces and districts, and the size of the bureaucracy doubled.23 Government departments were concentrated into nine central ‘Colleges’, run by collective boards. A modern iron industry was installed in the Urals, which was to make Russia one of the largest metal producers of the epoch. The budget was quadrupled, largely with resources from a new soul tax on serfs. Average peasant taxes quintupled from 1700 to 1707–8.
The bulk of this greatly enlarged State revenue – two-thirds to four-fifths – was devoted to the construction of a professional army and modern navy:24 the two over-riding goals of the whole Petrine programme, to which all other measures were subordinated. In the Great Northern War from 1700 to 1721, the Swedish assault on Russia was initially successful: Charles XII routed Tsarist forces at Narva, overran Poland and raised the Cossack hetman Mazeppa against Peter I in the Ukraine. The Russian victory of Poltava in 1709, completed by naval triumph in the Gulf of Finland and invasion of Sweden itself, reversed the whole balance of forces in Eastern Europe. Swedish power was finally repulsed and defeated, and with its fall two decisive geopolitical gains were made by the Tsarist Empire. By the Treaty of Nystadt in 1721, the Russian frontiers at last reached the Baltic: Livonia, Estonia, Ingria and Karelia were annexed, and direct maritime access to the West was assured. In the South, Turkish armies had nearly inflicted catastrophe on over-extended Russian troops in a separate conflict, and the Tsar was fortunate to extricate himself without serious losses. No significant gains were secured along the Black Sea: but the menace of the free-booting Seek of the Zaporozhe Cossacks, who had always hindered any permanent settlement of the Ukrainian hinterland, was brought to an end with the suppression of Mazeppa’s rebellion. Russian Absolutism emerged from the twenty-year struggle of the Great Northern War a looming force over Eastern Europe. Domestically, Bulavin’s rebellion against official serf-recovery and labour-conscription in the lower Don region was successfully suppressed, and the more protracted Bashkir revolt against Russian colonization in the Ural-Volga region was isolated and defeated. Yet the profile of the Petrine State, with its tireless coercion and territorial advances, must be set against the dismal backwardness of its environment, which deeply affected its real character. For all the reorganization and repression exercised by Peter I, haphazard corruption and peculation were endemic: one guess is that perhaps only a third of tax-revenues actually reached the State.25 The forcible attempt to draft the whole nobility for life into the services of Tsarism proved supernumerary soon after Peter’s death. For once an aristocracy inured to Absolutism was solidly formed and stabilized, Peter’s successors could afford to relax and then eliminate the compulsory character of its obligations, which were terminated by his grandson Peter III in 1762; by then the gentry was securely and spontaneously integrated into the apparatus of the State.
Under a succession of weak rulers – Catherine I, Peter II, Anna and Elizabeth – the Guards Regiments which Peter I had created became after his death the cockpit of magnate struggles for power in St Petersburg, whose very putsches were a tribute to the consolidation of the Tsarist institutional complex: nobles henceforward intrigued within the Autocracy, not against it.26 The arrival of another resolute sovereign in 1762 was thus the signal, not for an outbreak of tension between the monarchy and nobility, but for their most harmonious reconciliation. Catherine II proved to be the most ideologically conscious ruler of Russia and the most amply generous to her class. Aspiring to a European reputation for political Enlightenment, she promulgated a new educational system, secularized church lands, and promoted a mercantilist development of the Russian economy. The currency was stabilized, the iron industry expanded, and the volume of foreign trade increased. The two great landmarks of Catherine II’s reign, however, were the extension of organized serf agriculture to the whole of the Ukraine, and the promulgation of the Charter of the Nobility. The condition of the first was the destruction of the Tartar Khanate of the Crimea, and the breaking of Ottoman power along the northern coastline of the Black Sea. The Crimean Khanate, as a Turkish vassal state, not only kept Russia out of the Euxine: its perpetual raiding churned and devastated the Pontic plains inland, keeping much of the Ukraine an insecure and depopulated no-man’s-land long after its formal incorporation into the Romanov realm. The new Empress directed the full force of the Russian armies against Islamic control of the Black Sea. By 1774, the Khanate had been detached from the Porte, and the Ottoman frontier pushed back to the Bug. In 1783, the Crimea was annexed outright. A decade later, the Russian border had reached the Dniester. Sevastopol and Odessa were founded on the new Tsarist littoral; naval entry into the Mediterranean through the Straits appeared to be within reach.
Much more important in the short-run, however, were the consequences of this Southern advance for Russian agriculture. The final elimination of the Tartar Khanate permitted the organized settlement and reclamation of the vast Ukrainian steppes, large tracts of which were now for the first time converted into arable tillage and planted with a stable, sedentary peasant population on large estates. Managed by Potemkin, the agrarian colonization of the Ukraine represented probably the largest single geographical clearance in the history of European feudal agriculture. No technical progress in the rural economy was registered by this great territorial advance, however: it was a purely extensive gain. Socially, it subjugated the once free or semi-free inhabitants of the border regions to the condition of the central peasantry, increasing the total serf population of Russia steeply. During Catherine II’s reign, the volume of money rents paid by serfs increased in some cases up to five times over; any upper limit on the extraction of labour services was rejected by the government; huge numbers of State peasants were handed over to leading nobles for intensified private exploitation. This dramatic, concluding episode of the enserfment of the rural masses was met by the last and greatest of the cossack-inspired rebellions, led by Pugachev – a seismic revolt that shook the whole Volga and Ural regions, mobilizing huge, confused masses of peasants, iron-workers, nomads, mountaineers, heretics and homesteaders in a final, desperate assault on the ruling order.27 The Tsarist towns and garrisons held firm, however, while the imperial army was deployed to crush the revolt. Its defeat marked the closure of the Eastern frontier. Russian villages sank into stillness thereafter. The Charter of the Nobility granted by the Empress in 1785 completed the long journey of the peasantry into servitude. By it, Catherine II guaranteed the aristocracy all its privileges, released it from compulsory duties, and ensured it total jurisdictional control of its rural labour force: devolution of a measure of provincial administration smoothly transferred local functions to the gentry.28 The typical parabola of ascendant Absolutism was now complete. The monarchy had risen in concord with the gentry in the 16th century (Ivan IV); they had at times clashed violently in the 17th century, amidst magnate predominance, complex shifts and dislocations within the State, and social turbulence outside it (Michael I); the monarchy had achieved an implacable autocracy by the early 18th century (Peter I); nobility and monarchy thereafter regained a reciprocal serenity and harmony (Catherine II).
The strength of Russian Absolutism was soon revealed in its international successes. Catherine II, the main initiator of the Partitions of Poland, was also their major beneficiary when the operation was completed in 1795. The Tsarist Empire was increased by some 200,000 square miles, and now stretched nearly to the Vistula. Within the next decade, Georgia was annexed in the Caucasus. It was the grandiose trial of strength constituted by the Napoleonic Wars, however, which demonstrated the new European pre-eminence of the Tsarist State. Socially and economically the most backward Absolutism in the East, Russia proved politically and militarily the only ancien régime, from one end of the continent to the other, to be capable of withstanding French attack. Already in the last decade of the 18th century, Russian armies were for the first time in history dispatched deep into the West – into Italy, Switzerland and Holland – to stamp out the flames of the bourgeois revolution still fanned by the Consulate. The new Tsar Alexander I participated in the unsuccessful Third and Fourth Coalitions against Napoleon. But while Austrian and Prussian Absolutism were undone at Ulm and Wagram, Jena and Auerstadt, Russian Absolutism won a respite at Tilsit. The division of spheres concluded between the two Emperors in 1807 permitted Russia to proceed to the conquest of Finland (1809) and Bessarabia (1812), at the expense of Sweden and Turkey. Finally, when Napoleon launched his full-scale invasion of Russia, the Grande Armée proved incapable of smashing the structure of the Tsarist State. Victorious at the outset on the field, the French attack was ostensibly ruined by climate and logistics; but in reality by the impenetrable resistance of a feudal environment too primitive to be vulnerable to the blade of bourgeois expansion and emancipation from the West, now long blunted by Bonapartism.29 The retreat from Moscow signalled the end of French dominance throughout the continent: within two years, Russian troops were bivouacked in Paris. Tsarism crossed into the 19th century the victorious gendarme of European counter-revolution. The Congress of Vienna sealed its triumph: another great wedge of Poland was annexed, and Warsaw became a Russian city. Three months later the Holy Alliance was solemnized, at the personal insistence of Alexander I, to guarantee royal and clerical restorationism from the Guadarrama to the Urals.
The structures of the Tsarist State which emerged from the Vienna settlement, untouched by any transformation comparable to the Austrian or Prussian Reforms, had no parallel anywhere in Europe. The State was officially proclaimed an Autocracy: the Tsar ruled for the whole nobility, in his name alone.30 Under him, a feudal hierarchy was cemented into the very rungs of the State system itself. By a decree of Nicholas I in 1831, a modernized hierarchy of ranks was created within the noble class corresponding to the stepped echelons of the State bureaucracy. Vice-versa, all those occupying determinate positions in the service of the State were given corresponding noble rank, which above certain levels became hereditary. Aristocratic titles and privileges thus continued to be related by the political system to different administrative functions, down to 1917. The landowning class thus welded to the State controlled some 21,000,000 serfs. It was itself highly stratified: four-fifths of these serfs were tied to the lands of one-fifth of proprietors, while the greatest nobles – a mere 1 per cent of the dvoriantsvo as a whole – owned estates with nearly one-third of the total population of private serfs. Petty squires with holdings of less than 21 souls were excluded from gentry assemblies from 1831–2 onwards. The Russian aristocracy retained its service orientation down into the 19th century, and its aversion from agrarian management. Few gentry families had local roots going back more than 2 or 3 generations, and absentee ownership was widespread: urban residence – provincial or metropolitan – was the normal ideal of the middle and upper aristocracy alike.31 Positions in the State apparatus were the by now traditional means of achieving it.
The State itself owned land with 20,000,000 serfs on it – two-fifths of the peasant population of Russia. It was thus directly the most colossal feudal proprietor in the country. The Army was built on random conscription of serfs, with the hereditary nobility dominating its command structure, in accordance with its rank. The Grand Dukes occupied the General Inspectorates of the Army and the War Council: down to and into the First World War, the Commanders-in-Chief were the cousins or uncles of the Tsar. The Church was a subdivision of the State, subordinated to a bureaucratic department (the Holy Synod) whose head – the Senior Procurator – was a civil official designated by the Tsar. The Synod had the status of a Ministry, with an Economic Administration dealing with Church Property, and was mainly staffed by lay officials. Priests were treated as functionaries, who owed duties to the government (they had to report confessions which revealed ‘evil intent’ towards the State). The educational system was contolled by the State, and Rectors and Professors of Universities were by mid-century appointed directly by the Tsar and his Ministers. The vast, proliferating bureaucracy was integrated at the top only by the person of the Autocrat, and the corridor rule of his private chancellery32 – there were Ministers, but no Cabinet, three competing swarms of police, and generalized peculation. The ideology of clerical and chauvinist reaction which presided over this system was proclaimed by the official trinity: Autocracy, Orthodoxy, Nationality. The military and political power of the Tsarist State in the first half of the 19th century found continued demonstration in foreign expansion and interventionism. Azerbaijan and Armenia were occupied, and mountaineer resistance in Circassia and Daghestan gradually broken; neither Persia nor Turkey was in any position to resist Russian annexations in the Caucasus. In Europe itself, Russian armies struck down the national revolt in Poland in 1830, and wiped out the revolution in Hungary in 1849. Nicholas I, high executioner of monarchist reaction abroad, ruled at home over the only major country in the continent unaffected by the popular upsurges of 1848. The international strength of Tsarism had never seemed greater.
In fact, the industrialization of Western Europe was rendering its confidence anachronistic. The first serious shock to Russian Absolutism came with the humiliating setback inflicted on it by the capitalist States of England and France, in the Crimean War of 1854–6. The fall of Sevastopol can be compared in its domestic consequences with the rout at Jena. Military defeat by the West led to the abolition of serfdom by Alexander II, as the most elementary social modernization of the bases of the ancien régime. But the parallel should not be exaggerated. For the extent of the blow to Tsarism was a much milder and more limited one: the Peace of Paris was by no means the Treaty of Tilsit. The Russian ‘Reform Era’ of the 1860’s was thus only a faint echo of its Prussian predecessor. Juridical procedures were somewhat liberalized; the rural nobility was given zemstvo organs of self-administration; municipal councils were conferred on the towns; general conscription was introduced. Alexander’s emancipation of the peasantry in 1861 was itself executed in a fashion no less lucrative to the dvoriantsvo than Hardenberg’s had been to the junkers. Serfs were allocated the land they had previously cultivated from noble estates, in exchange for payment of monetary compensation to their lords. The State advanced this compensation to the aristocracy, and then reclaimed it over a period of years from the peasantry, in the form of ‘redemption payments’. In Northern Russia, where land values were low and servile dues were paid in kind (obrok), the landowners extorted nearly twice the market price of the land in cash compensation. In Southern Russia, where servile dues took the form mainly of labour services (barshchina) and the rich, black soil permitted profitable cereal exports, the gentry defrauded their peasants of up to 25 per cent of the best land owing to them (the so-called otreiki).33 The peasantry, weighed down with redemption debts, thus suffered a net subtraction from the total land they had previously cultivated for their families. Moreover, the abolition of serfdom did not mean the end of feudal relations in the countryside, any more than it had done earlier in Western Europe. In practice, a labyrinth of traditional forms of extra-economic surplus extraction, embodied in customary rights and dues, continued to prevail on Russian estates.
In his pioneering study on The Development of Capitalism in Russia, Lenin wrote that after the abolition of serfdom, the ‘capitalist economy could not emerge at once, and the corvée economy could not disappear at once. The only possible system of economy was, accordingly, a transitional one, a system combining the features of both the corvée and the capitalist systems. Indeed, the post-Reform system of farming practised by the landlords bears precisely those features. With all the endless variety of forms characteristic of a transitional epoch, the economic organization of contemporary landlord farming amounts to two main systems – the labour-service system and the capitalist system. . . . The systems mentioned are actually interwoven in the most varied and fantastic fashion: on a mass of landlord estates there is a combination of the two systems, which are applied to quite different farming operations.’34 Computing the relative incidence of the two economies, Lenin calculated that by 1899 ‘although the labour-service system predominates in the purely Russian gubernias, the capitalist system of landlord farming must be considered the predominant one at present in European Russia as a whole’.35 A decade later, however, the tremendous peasant upsurges against the feudal exactions and oppressions of the Russian countryside during the 1905 Revolution led Lenin to modify the balance of this judgement significantly. In his basic text of 1907, The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, he stressed that: ‘In the purely Russian gubernias large-scale capitalist farming definitely drops into the background. Small-scale farming preponderates on large latifundia, comprising various forms of tenant farming based on servitude and bondage.’36 After a careful statistical assessment of the whole agrarian situation, covering the distribution of land during the first year of the Stolypin reaction, Lenin summed up his survey with the following general conclusion: ‘Ten and a half million peasant households in European Russia own 75,000,000 dessiatins of land. Thirty thousand, chiefly noble, but partly also upstart, landlords each own 500 dessiatins – altogether 70,000,000 dessiatins. Such is the main background of the picture. Such are the main reasons for the predominance of feudal landlords in the agricultural system of Russia and, consequently, in the Russian State generally, and in the whoe of Russian life. The owners of the latifundia are feudal landlords in the economic sense of the term: the basis of their landownership was created by the history of serfdom, by the history of land-grabbing by the nobility through the centuries. The basis of their present methods of farming is the labour-service system, i.e. a direct survival of the corvée, cultivation of the land with the implements of the peasants and by the virtual enslavement of the small tillers in an endless variety of ways: winter hiring, annual leases, half-share metayage, leases based on labour rent, bondage for debt, bondage for cut-off lands, for the use of forests, meadows, water, and so on and so forth, ad infinitum.’37 Five years later, Lenin reaffirmed this judgement even more categorically, on the eve of the First World War: ‘The difference between “Europe” and Russia stems from Russia’s extreme backwardness. In the West, the bourgeois agrarian system is fully established, feudalism was swept away long ago, and its survivals are negligible and play no serious role. The predominant type of social relationship in Western agriculture is that between the wage-labourer and the employer, the farmer or landowner. . . . Undoubtedly a system of agriculture just as capitalist has already become firmly established and is steadily developing in Russia. It is in this direction that both landlord and peasant farming is developing. But purely capitalist relations in our country are still overshadowed to a tremendous extent by feudal relations.’38
The capitalist development within Russian agriculture which Lenin and other socialists predicted would occur if Tsarism succeeded in re-establishing its power durably after the counter-revolution of 1907, was the ‘Prussian road’ of rationalized junker-type estates using wage-labour and integrated into the world market, accompanied by the emergence of a stratum of auxiliary Grossbauern in the countryside. Lenin’s writings in the period 1906–14 repeatedly warn that such an evolution was possible in Tsarist Russia, and was a serious danger to the revolutionary movement. Stolypin’s reforms, in particular, were designed to accelerate just such an evolution by their ‘wager on the strong’ – the conversion of repartitional into hereditary peasant tenure in the villages, in order to promote the rise of a kulak class. In fact, Stolypin’s programme fell considerably short of its objective at the level of the peasantry itself. For while half of all peasant households had juridically hereditary plots by 1915, only one-tenth of them had allotments that were physically consolidated into single units: the survival of the separate-strip and open-field system ensured that the communal constraints of the village mir thus remained.39 Meanwhile, the burden of redemption arrears and taxes increased year by year. The instinctive solidarity of the Russian peasantry against the landowning class was not seriously breached by the reforms. The Bolsheviks were to be surprised by the passionate unity of popular anti-feudal sentiment in the countryside in 1917, as Trotsky later testified.40 Over-population in the villages became an endemic problem in late Tsarist Russia. The share of peasant farms in total landed property increased by a half – mainly kulak purchases – in the last four decades before 1917, while actual per capita holdings of the peasantry dropped by a third.41 The rural masses remained mired in secular backwardness and poverty.
On the other hand, the last decades of Tsarism did not witness a dynamic conversion of the landowning nobility to capitalist agriculture either. The fears of a ‘Prussian Road’ did not, in fact, materialize. The dvoriantsvo proved organically incapable of following the path of the junkers. Initially, the shake-out in noble estate ownership looked as if the Prussian experience might repeat itself, a re-selection and rationalization of the landowning class. For there was a decline in gentry-owned land of perhaps a third in the three decades before 1905, and the major purchasers – as in Prussia – were initially wealthy merchants and bourgeois. However, after the 1880’s, rich peasant acquisitions overtook those of urban investors. By 1905, the average merchant estate was larger than that of the average noble, but kulak gains in total acreage were half as great again as those of townsmen.42 Thus a stratum of Grossbauern was, in fact, clearly emerging in Russia before the First World War. But what was completely missing was any capitalist jump in productivy of the Prussian type. Grain exports to Europe, of course, developed throughout the century, both before and after the Reform of 1861: Russia in the 19th century attained the same position in the international market as Poland or East Germany in the 16th to 18th centuries, although international grain prices drifted downwards from 1870 onwards. However, output and yields remained very low throughout Russian agriculture, which was extremely backward technically. The three-field system still prevailed on a very wide scale, there were virtually no forage crops, and half the peasantry used wooden ploughs. Moreover, as we have seen, innumerable feudal economic relationships continued to characterize the twilight era after the Reform, hampering economic advance on the large estates of Central Russia. The nobility did not achieve the transition to a modern or rational capitalist agriculture. It was symptomatic that while specially created Land Banks had proved a highly successful device for the junkers after the Reform Era in Prussia, providing them with the capital for mortgages and investment, the Land Bank created by the State for the nobility in 1885 was a lugubrious fiasco: its credits were generally squandered, while their recipients sank into debt.43 Thus, while there is no doubt at all that capitalist relations of production were steadily spreading through the countryside before the First World War, they never acquired the impetus of cumulative economic success, and always remained entangled in the prevalent pre-capitalist undergrowth. The predominant sector of Russian agriculture in 1917 was consequently characterized by feudal relations of production.
Meanwhile, of course, industrialization was rolling rapidly forward in the towns. By the early 20th century, Russia had acquired large coal, iron, oil and textile industries, and an extensive railway network. Many of its metallurgical complexes were among the most technologically advanced in the world. There is no need to stress here the notorious internal contradictions of Tsarist industrialization: capital investment was essentially financed by the State, which was dependent on foreign loans; to raise these loans, budget solvency was necessary and hence very heavy tax burdens had to be maintained on the peasantry; these then blocked the expansion of the internal market, which was necessary to sustain further investment.44 For our purposes, the important fact is rather that, despite all these obstacles, the Russian industrial sector – based squarely and fully on capitalist relations of production – trebled in size in the two decades before 1914, recording one of the fastest growth rates in Europe.45 On the eve of the First World War, Russia was the fourth largest producer of steel (above France) in the world. The absolute size of the industrial sector was the fifth in the world. Agriculture now accounted for about 50 per cent of the national income, while industry provided perhaps 20 per cent, excluding the large railway system.46 Thus calculating the weight of the rural and urban economies together, there can be no doubt that by 1914, the Russian social formation was a composite structure, with a predominantly feudal agrarian sector, but a combined agro-industrial capitalist sector that was now overall preponderant. Lenin expressed this laconically on the eve of his departure from Switzerland when he said that by 1917 the bourgeoisie had already ruled the country economically for some years.47
Yet, while the Russian social formation was dominated by the capitalist mode of production, the Russian State remained a feudal Absolutism. For no basic change in its class character or political structure supervened in the epoch of Nicholas II. The feudal nobility continued, as before, to be the ruling class of Imperial Russia: Tsarism was the political apparatus of its domination, from which it was never shifted. The bourgeoisie was far too weak to pose a serious autonomous challenge, and never succeeding in occupying commanding positions in the administration of the country. The Autocracy was a feudal Absolutism that had survived into the 20th century. Military defeat by Japan, and the massive popular explosion against the regime which followed on its heels in 1905, forced a series of modifications on Tsarism whose direction appeared to Russian liberals to permit an evolution towards a bourgeois monarchy. The formal possibility of such a cumulative change of character existed, as we have seen in the case of Prussia. Historically, however, the hesitant steps of Tsarism never seriously approached this goal. The aftermath of the 1905 Revolution led to the creation by the regime of a powerless Duma and a paper Constitution. The latter was torn up within a year by the dissolution of the former, and by a revision of the electorate that conferred on every landowner voting rights equivalent to those of 500 workers. The Tsar could veto any legislation proposed even by this tame assembly, while Ministers – now grouped in a conventional Cabinet – had no responsibility to it. The Autocracy could decree laws at will merely by proroguing this representative facade. There was thus no comparison with the situation in Imperial Germany, where universal male suffrage, regular elections, parliamentary budgetary control and unrestricted political activity existed. The qualitative political transmutation of the feudal Prussian State when it produced the capitalist German State never occurred in Russia. Both the organizing principles and personnel of Tsarism remained unaltered to the end.
Lenin expressly and repeatedly emphasized this difference in his polemics with the Mensheviks in 1911: ‘To maintain that the system of government in Russia has already become bourgeois (as Larin says), and that governmental power in our country is no longer of a feudal nature (see Larin again), and at the same time to refer to Austria and Prussia as an example, is to refute oneself! . . . You cannot transfer to Russia the German completion of the bourgeois revolution, the German history of a democracy that had spent itself, the German “revolution from above” of the 1860’s, and the actually existing German legality.’48 Lenin did not, of course, overlook the necessary autonomy of the Tsarist State apparatus from the feudal landowning class – an autonomy inscribed in the very structures of Absolutism. ‘The class character of the tsarist monarchy in no way militates against the vast independence and self-sufficiency of the tsarist authorities and of the “bureaucracy”, from Nicholas II down to the last police officer.’49 He took care to stress the increasing impact of industrial and agrarian capitalism on the policies of Tsarism, and the objective interposition of the bourgeoisie in its workings. But he was always categorical in his characterization of the fundamental social nature of Russian Absolutism in his own time. In April 1917, he stated unequivocally: ‘Before the February-March revolution of 1917, state power in Russia was in the hands of one old class, namely, the feudal landed nobility, headed by Nicholas Romanov.’50 The very first sentence of the Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution, written immediately after his arrival in Petrograd, reads: ‘The old tsarist power. . . represented only a handful of feudalist landowners who commanded the entire state machinery (the army, police and the bureaucracy).’51 This limpid formulation was the simple truth. Its consequences, however, have yet to be explored. For, to recapitulate the analysis developed above, there was a dislocation between the social formation and State in the last years of Tsarism. The Russian social formation was a complex ensemble dominated by the capitalist mode of production, but the Russian State remained a feudal Absolutism. The disjunctive articulation between the two remains to be explained, and founded, theoretically.
For the moment, the empirical consequences of this disjuncture for the structures of the Russian State must be considered. Tsarism remained down to its last hour in essence a feudal Absolutism. Even in its final phase, it continued to expand territorially outwards. Siberia was extended beyond the Amur, and Vladivostok was founded in 1861. After two decades of fighting, Central Asia was absorbed by 1884. Administrative and cultural russification was intensified in Poland and Finland. Institutionally, moreover, the State was in certain decisive respects far more powerful than any Western Absolutism had ever been, because it survived into the epoch of European industrialization, and therefore was able to import the most advanced technology in the world and appropriate it to itself. For the State had relinquished its grip on agriculture by the sale of its lands, only to entrench itself securely in industry. It had traditionally owned the mines and metallurgical works in the Urals. It now financed and built most of the new railway system, which accounted for the second largest budgetary outlay – after the armed forces. Public contracts dominated Russian industry generally – two-thirds of engineering output was taken by the State. Tariffs were extremely high (4 times German or French levels and 2 times US levels), so that local capital depended critically on State supervision and protection. The Ministry of Finance manipulated the State Bank’s loaning policy to private entrepreneurs, and established general ascendancy over them with its large gold reserves. The Absolutist State in Russia was thus the major engine of rapid industrialization from above. In the laissez-faire capitalist epoch of 1900, its swollen economic role had no comparison in the developed West. Combined and uneven development thus produced in Russia a colossal State apparatus, covering and suffocating the whole society beneath the level of the ruling-class. It was a State that had integrated feudal hierarchy bodily into the bureaucracy, incorporated the Church and education, and supervised industry, while spawning a gargantuan army and police-system.
This late feudal apparatus was, of course, inevitably over-determined by the rise of industrial capitalism in the late 19th century, just as the Absolute Monarchies in the West in their time had been over-determined by the rise of mercantile capitalism. Paradoxically, however, the Russian bourgeoisie remained politically far weaker than its Western predecessors, although the economy it represented was far stronger than theirs had been during the epoch of transition in the West. The historical reasons for this weakness are well-known, and are discussed again and again in Trotsky and Lenin: absence of petty-bourgeois artisanate, small numbers due to large enterprises, fear of the tumultuous working-class, dependence on State tariffs, loans and contracts. ‘The farther East one goes, the more cowardly and weak becomes the bourgeoisie’, proclaimed the first Manifesto of the RSDLP. The Russian Absolutist State, however, did not fail to reveal the imprint of the class which became its sullen and timorous auxiliary, rather than its antagonist. Just as the sale of offices in an earlier age provided a sensitive register of the subordinate presence of the mercantile class within the Western social formations, so the notorious bureaucratic contradiction between the two main pillars of the Russian State, the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Finance, was a signal of the ‘effects’ of industrial capital in Russia. By the 1890’s, there was constant conflict between these central institutions.52 The Ministry of Finance pursued policies that were consonant with orthodox bourgeois aims. Its factory inspectorate supported employers in refusing to make wage concessions to workers; it was hostile to the village communes which represented an obstacle to the free market in land. Locked in struggle with it, the Ministry of the Interior was obsessed with the maintenance of the political security of the feudal State. It was above all concerned to prevent any public disorders or social strife. In pursuit of these aims, its repressive network of police spies and provocateurs was immense. Simultaneously, however, it had little sympathy for the corporate interests of industrial capital. Thus it pressured employers to make economic concessions to workers, so as to avoid the danger of their making political demands. It suppressed all strikes, which were illegal anyway, but wanted to get permanent police officials into the factories to study conditions there and ensure they did not provoke explosions. The employers and the Finance Ministry naturally resisted this, and a struggle ensued for control of the Factory Inspectorates, which were retained by the Finance Ministry only after an engagement to collaborate with the police. In the countryside, the Ministry of the Interior looked with bureaucratic paternalism on the village communes, from which it – not the Finance Ministry – collected taxes, since it regarded them as bulwarks of submissive tradition and barriers against revolutionary agitation. This comedy of reactionary contrasts culminated in the invention of police trade-unions by the Ministry of the Interior, and the instituting of labour laws by the executioner Plehve. The boomerang results of this experiment – the Zubatovshchina – which eventually produced Gapon, are well-known. What is symptomatically more important here is this final, delirious bid by the Absolutist State, after having at one time or another incorporated nobility, bourgeoisie, peasantry, education, army and industry, to produce even its own trades-unions under the aegis of the autocracy. Gramsci’s abrupt dictum that: ‘In Russia the State was everything, civil society was primordial and gelatinous’,53 thus contained a real historical truth.
Gramsci, however, failed to see why this was so: a scientific definition of the historical character of the Absolutist State in Russia escaped him. We may now be in a position to remedy this gap in his text. Once Russian Absolutism is set into an epochal European perspective, everything falls into place. Its lineaments become immediately evident. The Autocracy was a feudal State, although Russia was by the 20th century a composite social formation dominated by the capitalist mode of production: a dominance whose remote effects are legible in the structures of Tsarism. Its time was not that of the Wilhelmine Empire or the Third Republic, its rivals or partners: its true contemporaries were the Absolute Monarchies of the transition from feudalism to capitalism in the West. The crisis of feudalism in the West produced an Absolutism which succeeded serfdom; the crisis of feudalism in the East produced an Absolutism that institutionalized serfdom. The Russian ancien régime survived its counterparts in the West so long, despite their common class nature and functions, because it was born from a different matrix. In the end, it drew its top-heavy strength from the very advent of industrial capitalism, by bureaucratically implanting it from above, as its Western predecessors had once promoted mercantile capitalism. The ancestors of Witte were Colbert or Olivares. The international development of capitalist imperialism, radiating into the Russian Empire from the West, was what made possible this combination of the most advanced technology in the industrial world with the most archaic monarchy in Europe. Eventually, of course, imperialism, which had initially armoured Russian Absolutism, engulfed and destroyed it: the ordeal of the First World War was too much for it.54 It might be said that it was literally ‘out of its element’ in a direct confrontation between industrial imperialist states. In February 1917, it was overturned by the masses in a week.
If all this is so, it is necessary to have the courage to draw the consequences. The Russian Revolution was not made against a capitalist State at all. The Tsarism which fell in 1917 was a feudal apparatus: the Provisional Government never had time to replace it with a new or stable bourgeois apparatus. The Bolsheviks made a socialist revolution, but from beginning to end they never confronted the central enemy of the workers’ movement in the West. Gramsci’s deepest intuition was in this sense correct: the modern capitalist State of Western Europe remained – after the October Revolution – a new political object for Marxist theory, and revolutionary practice. The profound crisis which shook the whole battle-ravaged continent in 1917–20 left its own significant, and selective heritage. The First World War brought to an end the long history of European Absolutism. The Russian imperial State was overthrown by a proletarian revolution. The Austrian imperial State was erased from the map by bourgeois national revolutions. The destruction and disappearance of both was permanent. The cause of socialism triumphed in Russia in 1917; and flickered briefly in Hungary in 1919. In Germany, however, the strategic key to Europe, the capitalist transmutation of the Prussian monarchy assured the integral survival of the old State apparatus into the Versailles epoch. The two last great feudal States of Eastern Europe fell to revolutions from below, of contrasted character. The capitalist State that had once been their legitimist consort resisted every revolutionary upsurge, amidst the despair and debris of its own defeat by the Entente. The failure of the November Revolution in Germany, as momentous for the history of Europe as the success of the October Revolution in Russia, was grounded in the differential nature of the State machine with which each was confronted. The mechanisms of socialist victory and defeat in these years go to the bottom of the deepest problems of bourgeois and proletarian democracy, which have still to be theoretically and practically solved in the second half of the 20th century. The political lessons and implications of the fall of Tsarism, for a comparative study of contemporary social formations, remain to this day largely unexplored. The historical obituary of the Absolutism that expired in 1917 has in that sense yet to be completed.

1. A. N. Sakharov, ‘O Dialektike Istoricheskovo Razvitiya Russkovo Krest’-yantsva’, Voprosy Istorii, 1970, No. 1, pp. 21–2.
2. It has been claimed that the size of the internal market was larger in the 1560’s than in the mid 17th century, and the proportion of free labour in the work-force greater in the 16th than in the 18th century: D. I. Makovsky, Razvitie Tovarno-Denezhnykh Otnoshenii v Sel’skom Khozyaistve Russkovo Gosudarstva v XVI Veke, Smolensk 1960, pp. 203, 206.
3. R. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change in Muscovy, Chicago 1971, p. 24. This important work is the major recent synthesis on the whole question of the formation of Russian serfdom and the role of the service gentry in the early Tsarist state.
4. The example of the Polish Sejm can perhaps be detected in the convocation of this institution, which Ivan IV may have designed to attract West Russian nobles from Lithuania into the Muscovite orbit: Billington, The Icon and the Axe, pp. 99–100.
5. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change in Muscovy, pp. 37, 45, 115.
6. Phrase coined by R. G. Skrynnikov, and cited by A. L. Shapiro, ‘Ob Absoliutizme v Rossii’, Istoriya SSSR, May 1968, p. 73. Shapiro’s article is a reply to the essay by Avrekh alluded to earlier (see p. 19 above), which initiated a homeric debate among Soviet historians on the nature and path of Russian Absolutism, revealing an extremely wide range of positions, with a dozen or so contributions to Istoriya SSSR and Voprosy Istorii at the time of writing. There is much of interest in this discussion, to which we shall have occasion to refer.
7. See the concordant judgements of Vernadsky, The Tsardom of Moscow, Vol. I, pp. 137–9, and Shapiro, ‘Ob Absoliutizme v Rossii’, pp. 73–4.
8. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, pp. 95–7.
9. It is an error, however, to exaggerate the long-term set-back to the Russian economy which occurred in these years. Makovsky presents it as striking down burgeoning Russian capitalism just when it was on the point of fruition, and inflicting a secular regression of more than two centuries, with the consolidation of the pomeshchik class and of serfdom. ‘Thus in the 60’s and 70’s of the 16th century, the necessary economic conditions were ready in the Russian State for large-scale production, but the active intervention of the superstructure (with the mighty instruments of a strong feudal state) within economic relations in the interests of the gentry, not only hindered the development of new relations, but undermined the condition of the whole economy of the country’: Razvitie Tovarno-Denezhnykh Otnoshenii, pp. 200–1. The oprichnina, once presented as a salutary anti-feudal episode, becomes in this version a maleficent instrument of feudal reaction, capable of diverting the whole of Russian history from its previously progressive course. Such a judgement is manifestly unhistorical.
10. V. I. Koretsky, Zakreposhchenie Kresťyan i Klassovaya Bora v Rossii vo Vtoroi Polovine XVI v, Moscow 1970, p. 302. Koretsky’s research has pin-pointed more accurately than any previous work the precise phases and circumstances of legal adscription in the late 16th century: for his discussion of Godunov’s presumptive decree, whose text has not been recovered, see pp. 123–5, 127–34.
11. For Bolotnikov’s revolt, see Paul Avrich, Russian Rebels, London 1973, pp. 20–32.
12. J. L. H. Keep, ‘The Decline of the Zemsky Sobor’, Slavonic and East European Review, 36, 1957–8, pp. 105–7; and ‘The Regime of Filaret 1619–1633’, Slavonic and East European Review, 38, 1960, pp. 334–60, which provides a judicious account of the general policies of the Patriarch.
13. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, pp. 164–74.
14. N. I. Pavlenko, ‘K Voprosu o Genezisa Absoliutizma v Rossii’, Istoriya SSSR, April 1970, pp. 78–9. Pavlenko correcdy rejects the idea advanced by other participants in current Soviet historiographic discussion, under the influence of Engels’s famous formula, that the urban bourgeoisie played any central or independent role in the advent of Russian Absolutism – stressing, by contrast, the importance of inter-feudal frictions between large and small land-owners. The latter are extensively explored by Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, pp. 102–6, 114, 128–38.
15. This is acknowledged, but never adequately integrated into his general analysis, by Hellie. The major weakness of his book is its unduly restrictive notion of the State: Russian ‘government’ is frequently reduced to the uppermost handful of magnates and counsellers in Moscow, and its ‘purposes’ to their adventitious private appetites, precluding any concern with adscription of the peasantry (Enserfment and Military Change, p. 146). The result is to divorce the social process of enserfment from the political structure of the State, by conjuring away the basic unity of the landed class which determined their linkage. Serfdom becomes a fortuitous and illogical product of the crisis of 1648, an unpredictable concession to the gentry at the very moment when they had lost their military utility to the State, which might otherwise never have occurred (p. 134). In fact, it is obvious that two centuries of Russian serfdom did not depend on the ‘chance’ events of one year. Hellie’s own account subsequently demonstrates that the fundamental relationship between the boyar and gentry sections of the landowning class was not governed by their respective administrative roles or labour facilities, but by their common control of the major means of production, and joint interest in the exploitation and repression of the peasantry. The numerous and serious disputes between them always remained within this structural framework: hence their instinctive solidarity in social crises, when State power and agrarian property alike were threatened by peasant insurgency.
16. The main provisions of the Ulozhenie are set out in Vernadsky, The Tsardom of Moscow, I, pp. 399–411. The remaining municipal autonomy of Novgorod and Pskov was also terminated by the new code: L. A. Fedosov, ‘Sotsialnaya Sushchnost’ i Evoliutsiya Rossiiskovo Absoliutizma’, Voprosy Istorii, July 1971, pp. 52–3.
17. For computations of the size of the armed forces during the 17th century, see Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, pp. 267–9 who incorrectly claims that by the late 1670’s the Russian army was ‘much the largest in Europe’ (p. 226). In fact, the French military establishment was at least as great, and probably greater. But the comparative size – if not yet the skill – of the Muscovite armed forces was all the same formidable.
18. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, pp. 70–2.
19. Ibid., pp. 372, 229.
20. J. L. H. Keep, ‘The Muscovite Elite and the Approach to Pluralism’, Slavonic and East European Review, XLVIII, 1970, pp. 217–18.
21. M. Ya. Volkov, ‘O Stanovlenii Absoliutizma v Rossii’, Istoriya SSSR, January 1970, p. 104. A third regiment of Bodyguards or household cavalry was also formed.
22. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, p. 260.
23. I. A. Fedosov, ‘Sotsialnaya Sushchnosť i Evoliutsiya Rossiiskovo Absoliutizma’, pp. 57–60.
24. Hellie, Enserfment and Military Change, p. 256. For tax-increases, see Avrich, Russian Rebels, p. 139.
25. Dorn, Competition for Empire, p. 70. Prussian tax revenues were greater than those of Russia in the 1760’s, with a population a third the size.
26. The one attempt to impose constitutional limitations on the monarchy was Golitsyn’s scheme for rule by an oligarchic Privy Council in 1730, vaguely inspired by Swedish example; it was speedily scotched by a Guards revolt.
27. Avrich deems Pugachev’s rebellion the most formidable mass upheaval in Europe between the English and French Revolutions: for his analysis of its varied social composition, see Russian Rebels, pp. 196–225. The progressive geographical shift in the series of Russian peasant revolts, from Bolotnikov to Pugachev, is evident: they moved in a wide band from the South towards the East, along the least administered and controlled sectors of the frontier. No major upheaval ever occurred in the Central provinces of traditional Muscovy, by contrast – with their older settlement, ethnic homogeneity, and proximity to the capital.
28. Dukes, in a carefully documented volume, concludes that the ‘subservience’ of the Russian nobility to the Tsarist Autocracy has been much exaggerated: there was rather an easy social unity between the two. Paul Dukes, Catherine the Great and the Russian Nobility, Cambridge 1967, pp. 248–50.
29. The absence of any radical middle-class in Russia deprived the French invasion of any local political resonance. Napoleon refused to countenance emancipation of the serfs during his advance into Russia, although peasant deputations initially welcomed him, and the Governor-General of Moscow lived in fear of urban and rural rebellions against the Tsarist government. Napoleon, however, planned to come to a deal with Alexander I after defeating him, as he had done with Francis II, and did not intend to compromise this prospect with irreparable social measures in Russia. See the perceptive comments of Seton-Watson, The Russian Empire, pp. 129–30, 133.
30. H. Seton-Watson, The Decline of Imperial Russia, London 1964, pp. 5–27 provides a clear general survey of Russian society under Nicholas I.
31. T. Emmons, The Russian Landed Gentry and the Peasant Emancipation of 1861, Cambridge 1968, pp. 3–11.
32. Soviet historians tend to interpret the Personal Chancellery, which descended from Peter I’s Preobrazhensky Prikaz, as a ‘dualist’ decomposition of Absolutist centralization, and a symptom of the administrative decadence of Tsarism by the 19th century. See, for example, A. Avrekh, ‘Russkii Absoliutizm i Evo Rol’ v Utverzhdenii Kapitalizma v Rossii’, Istoriya SSSR, February 1968, p. 100; I. A. Fedosov, ‘Sotsialnaya Sushchnost’ Evoliutsiya Rossiiskovo Absoliutizma’, Voprosy Istorii, July 1971, p. 63.
33. Geroid T. Robinson, Rural Russia under the Old Regime, New York 1932, pp. 87–8.
34. V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 3, Moscow 1964, pp. 194–5.
35. Ibid., p. 197.
36. Ibid., Vol. 13, p. 225.
37. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 13, p. 421.
38. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 18, p. 74. This important article, ‘The Essence of “The Agrarian Problem of Russia” ‘, written in May 1912, is normally overlooked by students of Lenin’s writings on the subject.
39. Robinson, Rural Russia under the Old Regime, pp. 213–18.
40. History of the Russian Revolution, London 1965, Vol. I, pp. 377–9. It should be added that there were widespread attacks in 1917 by villagers on ‘secessionist’ peasants who had taken advantage of Stolypin’s reforms to leave their communes, and lands were now collectively repossessed by them, such was the strength of solidary feelings among the mass of the peasantry. See Launcelot Owen, The Russian Peasant Movement 1906–1913, New York 1963, pp. 153–4, 165–72, 182–3, 200–2, 209–11, 234–5.
41. Owen, The Russian Peasant Movement, p. 6. Population increased from some 74 million in 1860 to 170 million in 1916.
42. Robinson, Rural Russia under the Old Regime, pp. 131–5.
43. M. P. Pavlova-Sil’vanskaya, ‘K Voprosu Osobennostyakh Absoliutizma v Rossii’, Istoriya SSSR, April 1968, p. 85. Lenin himself was well aware of the difference between the junkers and the dvoriane, whom he characterized as respectively capitalist and feudal landowning classes: Collected Works, Vol. 17, p. 390.
44. There is an elegant analysis of this circle in T. Kemp, Industrialization in Nineteenth Century Russia, London 1969, p. 152.
45. T. H. Von Laue, Sergei Witte and the Industrialization of Russia, New York 1963, p. 269.
46. Raymond Goldsmith, ‘The Economic Growth of Tsarist Russia 1860–1913’, Economic Development and Cultural Change, IX, No. 3, April 1961, pp. 442, 444, 470–1: one of the most careful analyses of the economy in this period. The share of agriculture in the national income in 1913 was perhaps some 44 per cent in European Russia, and 52 per cent in the Tsarist Empire as a whole. Exact computations are very difficult because of statistical deficiencies.
47. Collected Works, Vol. 23, p. 303.
48. Collected Works, Vol. 17, pp. 235, 187. This theme recurs again and again in Lenin’s writings of this period; see Vol. 17, pp. 114–15, 146, 153, 233–41; Vol. 18, pp. 70–7. We shall have reason to revert to the crucial texts of these years for another purpose, in a later study.
49. Collected Works, Vol. 17, p. 363. Lenin emphasized that the autonomy of the Tsarist bureaucracy was in no sense due to an influx of bourgeois functionaries into it; its commanding echelons were manned by the landed nobility: p. 390. In fact, it seems probable that after the emancipation of the serfs, the nobility came to rely on employment in the State apparatus more than ever before: see Seton-Watson, The Russian Empire, p. 405.
50. Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 44.
51. Ibid., p. 57.
52. There is an instructive discussion of their contradictions in Seton-Watson, The Decline of Imperial Russia, pp. 114, 126–9, 137–8, 143.
53. Gramsci’s purpose was to contrast Russia here with Western Europe: ‘in the West, there was a proper relation between State and civil society, and when the State trembled a robust structure of civil society was at once revealed.’ Note sul Machiavelliy p. 68. We shall return at length elsewhere to the implications of this crucial passage, in which Gramsci tried to analyse the different strategic problems confronting the working-class movement in Eastern and Western Europe during the 20th century.
54. Tsarist imperialism itself was, of course, a mixture of feudal and capitalist expansion, with an inevitable and critical preponderance of the feudal component. Lenin took care in 1915 to make this necessary distinction: In Russia, capitalist imperialism of the latest type has fully revealed itself in the policy of Tsarism towards Persia, Manchuria and Mongolia, but in general, military and feudal imperialism is predominant in Russia.’ Collected Works, Vol. 21, p. 306.