13 -- The House of Islam

7
The House of Islam
The First World War, which flung the major capitalist States of the West against each other, and destroyed the last feudal States of the East, originated in the one corner of Europe where Absolutism never took root. The Balkans constituted a distinct geo-political sub-region, whose whole anterior evolution separated it from the rest of the continent: it was, in fact, precisely its lack of any traditional or stable integration into the international State-system of the late 19th and early 20th century which made it the ‘powder-keg’ of Europe, that eventually detonated the conflagration of 1914. The overall pattern of development in this sector of the continent thus provides a suitable control and epilogue to any survey of Absolutism. The Ottoman Empire remained through its existence on the continent a social formation apart. The Balkans under the rule of the Porte appeared to be curtained off from the general prospect of Europe, by Islamic subjection. But the regulative structure and dynamic of the Turkish State remains of great comparative significance, for the contrast it presents with either variant of European Absolutism. The character of the Ottoman system, moreover, provides the basic explanation of why the Balkan peninsula continued after the late mediaeval crisis to evolve in a pattern altogether divergent from that of the rest of Eastern Europe, with consequences lasting well into this century.
The Turkish warriors who overran Eastern Anatolia in the nth century were still desert nomads. They had owed their success in Asia Minor, where the Arabs had failed, partly to the similarity of its climatic and geographical environment with that of the cold, dry Central Asian plateaux from which they came: the Bactrian camel, their essential means of transport, was ideally suited to the Anatolian highlands, which had proved impassable to the tropical Arab dromedary.1 Yet they did not arrive merely as primitive steppe-dwellers. Turkish slave soldiers from Central Asia had served both Abbasid and Fatimid dynasties in the Middle East from the 9th century onwards, both as rank-and-file troops and as officers, often with the highest rank. The analogy with the role of the Germanic border tribes in the Later Roman Empire has often been pointed out. Fifty years before the battle of Manzikert, the Seljuks had descended from their oases in Turkestan into Persia and Mesopotamia, overthrowing the languishing Buyid State and creating a Greater Seljuk Empire with its capital in Baghdad. The bulk of these Turkish conquerors rapidly became sedentarized as the professional army and administration of the new Sultanate, which itself now inherited and assimilated the long and settled urban traditions of ‘Old Islam’ – with its pervasive Persian influences mediated through the legacy of the Abbasid Caliphate. At the same time, however, a constant fringe of unpacified Turcoman nomads pushed forward in disorderly surges on the edges of the new Empire. It was with the aim of rounding up and disciplining these irregulars that Alp Arslan had journeyed to the Caucasus and on his way stumbled into the fateful destruction of the Byzantine army at Manzikert.2 As we have seen earlier, no organized invasion of Anatolia by the Seljuk Sultanate followed this victory: its military preoccupations lay elsewhere, in the direction of the Nile, not the Bosphorus. It was the Turcoman pastoralists who inherited the fruits of Manzikert, and henceforward could ride virtually unopposed into the Anatolian interior. These frontier warriors and adventurers not only sought lands for their flocks: they were also, by a process of self-selection, typically stamped with the so-called ghazi outlook – a militant, crusading Muslim faith that rejected any accommodation with the infidel, such as had come to characterize the established states of Old Islam.3 Yet once Anatolia had effectively been occupied, in successive waves of migration from the 11th to the 13th century, the same conflict was reproduced in Asia Minor. The offshoot Seljuk Sultanate of Rum, centred in Konya, had soon recreated a prosperous, Persian-inspired State that was at constant loggerheads with the much more anarchic ghazi Emirates neighbouring it, especially the Danishmend, over which it eventually won the upper hand. However, all the contending Turkish States of Anatolia, of whatever type, were soon laid low by the Mongol invasions of the 13th century. The region reverted to a mosaic of petty emirates and wandering pastoralists. It was from out of this confusion that the Osmanli Sultanate emerged, from 1302 onwards, to become the dominant power, not merely in Turkey but throughout the whole Islamic world.
The peculiar dynamic animating the Ottoman State, which lifted it so far beyond the ranks of its rivals in Anatolia, lay in its unique combination of ghazi and Old Islamic principles.4 Fortuitously situated at the outset on the Nicaean plains immediately next to the residual Byzantine Empire, its frontier proximity in the Christian world kept its military and religious fervour at full pitch, when other emirates in the hinterland lapsed into relative laxity. The Osmanli rulers from the start conceived themselves as ghazi missionaries in a holy war against the infidel. At the same time, their territory lay on the main inland trade route across Asia Minor, and hence attracted the merchants and artisans, as well as religious ulemas, who were the indispensable social elements for an Old Islamic State with a non-nomadic, non-crusading institutional solidity. The Osmanli Sultanate that was steeled in constant mounted warfare from 1300 to 1350 thus came to yoke the legal and administrative sophistication of the Old Islamic cities to the fierce military and proselytizing zeal of the ghazi frontiersmen. At the same time, some of its basic social impetus still lay in the nomadic quest for land which had been the driving force of the original Turkish occupation of Anatolia.5 Territorial expansion was also a process of economic and demographic colonization.
The explosive potential of this political formula was soon felt in Christian Europe. The triumphant advance of the Turkish armies into the Balkans, driving deep into the Peninsula and so enveloping the beleagured Byzantine capital from behind, is well-known. In 1354, they were established in Gallipoli. In 1361, they had seized Adrianople. In 1389, Serbian, Bosnian and Bulgarian forces were annihilated at Kossovo, destroying further organized Slav resistance throughout most of the region. Thessaly, Morea and the Dobrudja were taken soon afterwards. In 1396, the Crusader expedition sent to stave off their advance was routed at Nicopolis. A brief pause followed, when Bayazid’s army, engaged in forcible annexations of fellow-Muslim emirates in Anatolia, encountered Tamerlane’s host sweeping through the region, and was shattered at Ankara, largely because its ghazi contingents deserted what they deemed an unholy and fratricidal cause. Rudely recalled to its religious vocation, the Osmanli State slowly reconstituted itself over the next fifty years on the other side of the Bosphorus, transferring its capital to Adrianople, in the front line of the war with Christendom.6 In 1453, Constantinople was taken by Mehmet II. In the 1460’s, Bosnia to the North and the Karamanid Emirate in Cilicia were seized. In the 1470’s, the Tartar Khanate in the Crimea was reduced to client status, and a Turkish garrison planted in Caffa. In the first twenty years of the 16th century, Syria, Egypt and the Hejaz were conquered by Selim I. In the next decade, Belgrade was captured, most of Hungary subjugated and Vienna itself besieged. By now, nearly the whole Balkan peninsula had been overrun. Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Eastern Hungary were Ottoman provinces. Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania were tributary principalities under satellite Christian rulers, surrounded by directly ruled Turkish territories on the Danube and the Dniester. The Black Sea was an Ottoman lake. In the Middle East, meanwhile, Iraq was annexed; the Caucasus was subsequently absorbed. In the Maghreb, Algiers, Tripoli and Tunis were successively subjected to Turkish sovereignty. The Sultan was henceforward Caliph over all the Sunni lands of Islam. At its apogee under Suleiman I in the mid-16th century, the Osmanli realm was the most powerful Empire in the world. Overshadowing his nearest European rival, Suleiman I enjoyed a revenue twice that of Charles V.
What was the nature of this Asian colossus? Its contours provide a strange contrast with those of the European Absolutism that was contemporary with it. The economic bedrock of the Osmanli despotism was the virtually complete absence of private property in land.7 The whole arable and pastoral territory of the Empire was deemed the personal patrimony of the Sultan, with the exception of waqf religious endowments.8 For Ottoman political theory, the cardinal attribute of sovereignty was the Sultan’s unlimited right to exploit all sources of wealth within his realm as his own Imperial Possessions.9 It followed that there could be no stable, hereditary nobility within the Empire, because there was no security of property which could found it. Wealth and honour were effectively coterminous with the State, and rank was simply a function of positions held within it. The State itself was loosely divided into parallel columns, subsequently designated by European historians (significantly, not by Ottoman thinkers themselves) as the ‘Ruling Institution’ and the ‘Muslim (or Religious) Institution’, although there was never any absolute separation between the two.10 The Ruling Institution comprised the total military and bureaucratic apparatus of the Empire. Its top stratum was overwhelmingly recruited from ex-Christian slaves, the core of whom were inducted into it by the invention of the devshirme. This institution, created probably in the 1380’s, was the most remarkable expression of the interpenetration of ghazi and Old Islamic principles that defined the ascendant Ottoman system as a whole.11 Every year, a levy was made of male children from Christian families of the subject population in the Balkans: taken from their parents, they were sent to Constantinople or Anatolia to be reared as Muslims and trained for posts of command in the army or administration, as the immediate servitors of the Sultan. In this way, both the ghazi tradition of religious conversion and military expansion, and the Old Islamic tradition of tolerance and tribute-collection from unbelievers, were conciliated.
The devshirme levy provided between 1,000 and 3,000 slave recruits for the Ruling Institution a year: they were supplemented by another 4–5,000 from war prisoners or foreign purchase, who underwent the same training process for elevation to prepotence and servitude.12 The Sultan’s slave corps so constituted provided the top ranks of the imperial bureaucracy, from the supreme office of Grand Vizir downwards through the ranks of provincial beylerbeys and sanjakbeys; and the totality of the permanent army of the Porte, which was composed both of the special cavalry of the capital, and the famous janissary regiments that formed the elite infantry and artillery arms of Ottoman power. (One of the key early functions of the devshirme was precisely to provide disciplined and reliable foot-soldiers in an age when the international dominance of cavalry was just coming to an end, and mounted Turcomans were proving very unsuitable material for conversion into professional infantry.) The astonishing paradox of a slave synarchy – unthinkable within European feudalism – has its intelligible explanation within the whole social system of Osmanli despotism.13 For there was a structural link between the absence of private property in land, and the eminence of State property in men. In effect, once any strict juridical concept of ownership was suspended in the fundamental domain of the basic wealth of the society, the conventional connotations of possession in the domain of manpower were by the same stroke diluted and transformed. Once all landed property was a prerogative of the Porte, it ceased to be degrading to be the human property of the Sultan: ‘slavery’ was no longer defined by opposition to ‘liberty’, but by proximity of access to the Imperial command, a necessarily ambiguous vicinity that involved complete heteronomy and immense privilege and power. The paradox of the devshirme was thus perfectly logical and functional within Ottoman society at its prime.
At the same time, the Sultan’s slave corps did not exhaust the Ruling Institution. For it coexisted with the native Islamic military stratum of sipahi warriors, who occupied a very different but complementary position within the system. These Muslim mounted soldiers formed a ‘territorial’ cavalry in the provinces. They were allocated by the Sultanate landed estates or timars (in some cases, these could be larger units or garnets), from which they were entitled to draw carefully fixed revenues in exchange for providing military service. The income from the timar determined the scope of the obligation of its holder: for every 3,000 aspers, the timariot had to provide an additional horseman. First instituted by Murad I in the 1360’s, it has been estimated that by 1475 there were some 22,000 sipahis in Rumelia and 17,000 in Anatolia (where timars were usually smaller).14 The total cavalry reserve that could be mobilized through this system was, of course, much larger. There was constant competition for timars in the European borderlands of the Empire; among others, successful janissaries were often awarded them for their services. The system was never fully extended by the Porte to the remoter Arab lands conquered in its rear in the early 16th century, where it could afford to dispense with the cavalry-service that was necessary on its Christian frontiers and in the Turkish hinterland close behind them. Thus the provinces of Egypt, Baghdad, Basra and the Persian Gulf had no timar lands, but were garrisoned by janissary troops and paid an annual fixed sum in taxes to the central Treasury. These regions typically played a much more important economic than military role in the Empire. The original axis of the Ottoman order lay across the Straits, and it was the institutions that prevailed in the ‘home countries’ of Rumelia and Anatolia – above all, Rumelia – that defined its basic form.
The timariots and zaims represented the nearest analogy to a knight class within the Ottoman Empire. But the timar estates were in no sense genuine fiefs. Although the sipahis performed certain administrative and policing functions for the Sultanate in their localities, they exercised no feudal lordship or seigneurial jurisdiction over the peasants who worked on their timars. The timariots played virtually no role in rural production at all: they were essentially external to the agrarian economy itself. The peasants, indeed, actually had hereditary security of tenure on the plots they tilled, while the timariots did not: timars were not inheritable, and at the access of every new Sultan their holders were systematically reshuffled in order to prevent them becoming entrenched in them. Closer to the pronoia system which juridically and etymologic-ally preceded it, the timars were much more limited in scope and firmly controlled from the centre than the Greek system had been.15 In the Ottoman Empire, they comprised less than half the cultivated land in Rumelia and Anatolia, the rest of which (apart from the wagfs) was reserved for the direct use of the Sultan, the imperial family or high functionaries of the palace.16 The timariot stratum was thus in this epoch both economically and politically a subordinate, if prominent component of the ruling order.
Set somewhat apart from the military-bureaucratic complex of the ‘Ruling Institution’ was the ‘Muslim Institution’. This comprised the religious, legal and educational apparatus of the State, and was naturally manned with few exceptions by orthodox Islamic natives. Kadi judges, ulema theologians, medresa teachers and a mass of other clerical stipendiaries performed the essential ideological and jural tasks of the system of Ottoman domination. The apex of the ‘Muslim Institution’ was the Mufti of Istanbul, or Sheikh-ul-Islam, a supreme religious dignitary who interpreted the sacred law of the Sharia for the faithful. Islamic doctrine had never admitted any separation or distinction between Church and State; the notion had scarcely any meaning for it. The Osmanli Empire was now the first Muslim political system to create a specially organized religious hierarchy with a clergy comparable to that of a full-scale church. Moreover, it was this hierarchy which provided the key judicial and civil personnel of the State apparatus on the ground; for the kadis recruited from the ulemate were the mainstay of Ottoman provincial administration. Thus here too, a novel compound of ghazi and Old Islamic pressures was at work. The religious zeal of the former found an outlet in the fanatical obscurantism of the Turkish ulemate, while the social gravitas of the latter was respected by its firm integration into the machinery of the Sultanate. One consequence was that the Sheikh-ul-Islam could, on occasion, block initiatives of the Porte by invoking tenets of the Shar’ia of which it was the official guardian.17 This formal limitation of the Sultan’s authority was in a sense the counterpart of the enhanced power accruing to the Ottoman State from its creation of a professional ecclesiastical apparatus. It in no way cancelled the political despotism exercised by the Sultan over his Imperial Possessions, which fully corresponded to Weber’s definition of a patrimonial bureaucracy in which problems of law everywhere tend to become simple questions of administration, bound by customary tradition.18
Given that the whole arable territory of the Empire was deemed the property of the Sultanate, the central domestic purpose of the Ottoman State, which determined its administrative organization and division, was naturally fiscal exploitation of the Imperial Possessions. To this end, the population was divided into the Osmanlilar ruling class, incorporating both the Ruling and Religious Institutions, and the rayah subject class, whether muslim or infidel. The vast bulk of the latter, of course, were the peasantry, who were Christian in the Balkans. No attempt was ever made to enforce mass conversion of the Balkan Christian populations under Ottoman rule. For to do so would have been to negate the economic advantages of an infidel rayah class, which by long traditions of Old Islam and the Sharia could be burdened with special taxes that were not extendable to Muslim subjects: there was thus a direct conflict between tribute-oriented toleration and missionary-oriented conversion. The devshirme, as we have seen, resolved this for the Osmanlis by siphoning off an islamized child levy, while leaving the rest of the Christian population in their traditional faith, and paying the traditional price for it. All Christian rayahs owed a special capitation tax to the Sultan, and tithes for the maintenance of the ulemate. In addition, those peasants who tilled the land of timars or ziamets owed money dues to the holders of these benefices. The rate of these dues was carefully fixed by the Porte, and could not be arbitrarily altered by the timariot or iaim. Tenants were granted security of tenure, to assure stability of fiscal yield, and protected against landlord exactions, to prevent local drainage of the surplus away from the imperial centre. The labour services that had existed under Christian princes were reduced or abolished.19 The right of peasants to shift residence was controlled, although not altogether eliminated; while in practice competition for labour among timariots encouraged informal mobility on the land. Thus during the 15th and 16th centuries, the Balkan peasantry suddenly found itself delivered from increasing servile degradation and seigneurial exploitation under its Christian rulers, and transferred to a social condition that was paradoxically in most respects milder and freer than anywhere else in Eastern Europe at the time.
The fate of the Balkan peasantry contrasted with that of their traditional lords. In the initial phases of Turkish conquest, sections of the local Christian aristocracies in the Balkans had gone over to the Ottomans, often fighting with them in the field as tributary allies and auxiliaries. This collaboration had occurred in Serbia, Bulgaria, Wallachia and elsewhere. With the consolidation of Ottoman imperial power in Rumelia, however, the residual autonomy of these lords came to an end. A few were converted to Islam and assimilated to the Ottoman ruling class, mainly in Bosnia. Some were granted timars in the new agrarian system, without conversion. But Christian timariots were not numerous, and their estates were usually modest, with small incomes. Within a few generations, they had died out completely.20 Thus throughout most of the Balkans, the local ethnic nobility was soon eliminated – a fact of great consequence for the future social development of the region. Beyond the Danube, in Wallachia, Moldavia and Transylvania alone, the Sultanate never proceeded to direct occupation and administration. In Wallachia and Moldavia, the recently formed Rumanian boyar class, which had itself only just emerged into the phase of political unification and economic subjection of the native peasantry, was permitted to preserve its lands and provincial power, merely paying a heavy annual tribute in kind to Istanbul. In Transylvania, Magyar landowners were left in dominion over an ethnic population mostly alien to them – Rumanian, Saxon or Szekler. Otherwise, Ottoman rule in South-Eastern Europe swept the Balkans clear of a local nobility. The ultimate results of this profound modification of the indigenous social systems were complex and contradictory.
On the one hand, as we have seen, it led to a definite amelioration of the material condition of the peasantry, after Turkish conquest was consolidated. Not only were rural dues and taxes lowered; but the long Ottoman peace in the subjugated South-East behind the front in Central Europe also lifted the bane of constant noble warfare from the countryside. On the other hand, however, the social and cultural results of the complete destruction of the native ruling classes were undoubtedly retrogressive. The Balkan aristocracies had exploited the peasantry much more oppressively than did Ottoman administration in its prime. But the very constitution of a landed nobility, in the late mediaeval and early modern epoch, represented an indubitable historical advance in these laggard social formations. For it signalled a rupture with clan principles of organization, tribal fragmentation, and the rudimentary cultural and political forms attendant on these. The price paid for this advance was, precisely, class stratification and increased economic exploitation. The late mediaeval Balkan States were notoriously weak and vulnerable, as we have seen. But their collapse prior to the Turkish invasions did not mean that they had no further potential for development: in fact, a pattern of apparent ‘false starts’ and subsequent recoveries was typical of early feudal Europe, both Western and Eastern, as we have seen, and usually took the initial form of ‘prematurely’ centralized administrative structures such as went under in the late mediaeval Balkans. The elimination of the local landowning class by the Turks henceforward precluded any such endogenous dynamic. On the contrary, its main cultural and political result was an actual regression to clannic institutions and particularist traditions among the Balkan rural population. Thus in the Serb lands – where this phenomenon has been particularly studied – the tribal pkmena, the chiefly knez and the kin-webbed zdruga, which were fast disappearing before Ottoman conquest, now revived as pervasive units of social organization, in the countryside.21 The general relapse into a patriarchal localism was accompanied by a notable decline in literacy. Cultural articulation of the life of the subject population became largely a monopoly of the Orthodox clergy, whose servility to the Turkish rulers was matched only by its ignorance and superstition. Towns lost their commercial or intellectual importance, becoming military and administrative centres of Ottoman rule, planted with Turkish craftsmen and shopkeepers.22 Thus, although the great mass of the rural population benefited materially from the initial impact of the Turkish conquest, because it led to a decline in the volume of surplus extracted from the immediate producers in the countryside, the other side of the same historical process was an interruption of any indigenous social development towards a more advanced feudal order, a regression to pre-feudal patriarchal forms, and a long stagnation in the whole historical evolution of the Balkan peninsula.
The Asian provinces of the Turkish Empire, meanwhile, experienced a notable revival and advance during the apogee of Ottoman power in the 16th century While Rumelia remained the main theatre of war for the Sultan’s armies, Anatolia, Syria and Egypt enjoyed the benefits of peace and unity brought to the Middle East by Osmanli conquest. The insecurity created by the decadence of the Mamluk States in the Levant gave way to firm and centralized administration, which suppressed brigandage and stimulated inter-regional trade. The late mediaeval depression of the Syrian and Egyptian economies, hard hit by invasion and plague, was reversed, as agriculture recovered and population rose. These two provinces came to provide a third of the receipts of the imperial treasury.23 In Anatolia, demographic growth may have been especially marked – a clear sign of agrarian expansion: the rural population perhaps increased by as much as two-fifths in the course of the century. Commerce flourished, both within the Eastern provinces themselves, and more especially along the international trade routes linking Western Europe to Western Asia, whether via the Mediterranean or the Black Sea. Roads were well-maintained, and official staging-posts constructed along them; waters were patrolled by Ottoman fleets against piracy. Spices, silks, cotton, slaves, velvets, alum and other commodities were shipped or caravaned across the Empire in large quantities. The transit trade of the Middle East throve under the protection of the Porte, to the benefit of the Ottoman State.
This commercial prosperity, in turn, led to an upswing of urban growth. The population of the towns may have neatly doubled in the 16th century.24 Osmanli society at its prime possessed a limited but flourishing number of manufacturing centres in Bursa, Edirne and other cities, producing or processing silks, velvets and other exports.25 When he conquered Byzantium, Mehmet II pursued a more enlightened economic policy than the Comneni or Paleologue Emperors, by abolishing Venetian and Genoese trading privileges and instituting a very mild protectionist tariff to promote local commerce. Within a century of Turkish rule, the size of Istanbul itself had increased from perhaps 40,000 to 400,000. In the 16th century, it was far the largest city in Europe.
However, the economic growth of the Empire in its ascendancy had definite limits from the start. The agricultural revival of the Asian provinces during the 16th century does not seem to have been accompanied by any major improvements in rural technology. The most significant innovation in the Middle Eastern countryside in the early modern epoch, the introduction of American maize, occurred in a later phase, when overall imperial decline had already set in. The demographic upsurge in Anatolia can be largely attributed to the restoration of peace and the sedentarization of nomadic tribes, as the stabilization of Ottoman rule permitted agricultural settlement to expand again after the late Byzantine depopulation. It was soon to reach negative limits, as the availability of land ran out at existing technical levels. At the same time, the revival of trade across the Empire did not necessarily find an equivalent reflection in the activity of domestic manufactures, or even the importance of local merchants. For the particular character of the urban economy and government in the Ottoman lands was always governed by the constraints of the Sultanate. Neither provincial workshops, nor a vast capital, nor periodic concern by individual rulers, could alter the basically inimical relationship of the Ottoman State to cities and industries. Islamic political traditions possessed no conception of urban liberties. Towns had no corporate or municipal autonomy: indeed, they had no legal existence at all. ‘Just as there was no state, but only a ruler and his agents, no courts but only a judge and his helpers, so there was no city but only a conglomeration of families, quarters and guilds, each with their own chiefs or leaders.’26 The towns, in other words, were without defense against the will of the Commander of the Faithful, and his servants. Official regulation of commodity prices and enforced purchase of raw materials controlled urban markets. Craft guilds were carefully supervised by the State, and their technical conservatism typically reinforced by it. Moreover, the Sultanate nearly always intervened against the interests of the indigenous merchant communities in the cities, which were regarded with consistent suspicion by the ulemate, and were detested by the artisan populace. State economic policy tended to discriminate against large-scale commercial capital, and to patronize petty production, with its guild archaism and religious bigotry.27 The characteristic Turkish town eventually came to be dominated by a stagnant and backward menupeuple that prevented any entrepreneurial innovation or accumulation. Given the nature of the Ottoman State, there was no protective space in which a Turkish mercantile bourgeoisie could develop, and from the 17th century onwards commercial functions devolved increasingly onto infidel minority communities, Greek, Jewish or Armenian, which had always anyway dominated the export trade with the West. Muslim traders or producers were thereafter generally confined to small shopkeeping and artisanal occupations.
Thus even at its height, the level of the Ottoman economy never achieved a degree of advance commensurate with the Ottoman polity. The basic motor-force of imperial expansion remained relentlessly military in character. Ideologically, the structure of Turkish dominion knew no natural geographical bounds. In Osmanli cosmogony the planet was divided into two great zones – the House of Islam and the House of War. The House of Islam comprised those lands inhabited by true believers, to be progressively assembled beneath the banners of the Sultan. The House of War covered the rest of the world, peopled by unbelievers whose destiny was to be conquered by the Soldiers of the Prophet.28 For practical purposes, this meant Christian Europe, at whose gates the Turks had established their capital. Throughout the history of the Empire, in fact, the real centre of gravity of the Osmanlilar ruling class was Rumelia – the Balkan Peninsula itself – not Anatolia, the Turkish homeland. It was from here that army after army would set forth, marching northwards to the House of War, to enlarge the abode of Islam. The fervour, mass and skill of the Sultan’s troops rendered them invincible in Europe for two hundred years after they first crossed into Gallipoli. The sipahi cavalry that rode out for seasonal campaigns and surprise forays, and the picked janissary infantry, proved deadly weapons of Ottoman expansion in South-Eastern Europe. The Sultans, moreover, did not hesitate to utilize Christian manpower and lore in ways other than the devshirme which provided its foot-regiments. Turkish artillery was among the most advanced in Europe, on occasion specially cast for the Porte by renegade Western engineers. The Turkish navy soon rivalled that of Venice, because of the experience of its Greek captains and crews.29 Voraciously appropriating military technicians and craftsmen from Europe, the Ottoman war machine at its peak combined the qualitative modernity of the best Christian armies with a quantitative mobilization far beyond that of any single Christian State ranged against it. Coalitions alone could withstand it along the Danubian frontiers. It was not until the siege of Vienna in 1529 that Spanish and Austrian pikes were able to lower the sabres of the janissaries.
The decay of Turkish despotism, however, gradually set in from the epoch in which its expansion was halted. The closure of the Osmanli frontiers in Rumelia was to have a chain series of repercussions backwards into the Empire. Compared with the Absolutist States of late 16th and early 17th century Europe, it was commercially, culturally and technologically backward. It had thrust its way into Europe through the continent’s weakest angle of defence – the crumbling socia revetments of the late mediaeval Balkans. Confronted with the far robuster and more representative Habsburg monarchies, it was ultimately incapable of prevailing, whether by land (Vienna) or by sea (Lepanto). Since the Renaissance, European feudalism had been giving birth to a mercantile capitalism that no Asian despotism could reproduce: least of all that of the Porte, with its complete innocence of inventions and contempt for manufactures. The cessation of Turkish expansion was determined by the ever-increasing economic, social and political superiority of the House of War. The results of this reversal of forces were manifold for the House of Islam. The structure of the Osmanlilar ruling class had rested on perpetual military conquest. It was this which permitted the anomalous dominance of the State apparatus by a slave-elite of non-Muslim origin; so long as the frontier unwound before the march of the Ottoman armies, the necessity and rationality of the janissary corps and the devshirme were justified in practice for the whole ruling order: the victories of Varna, Rhodes, Belgrade, Mohacs, were at this price. It was also this which rendered possible the initially moderate level of rural exploitation in the Balkans, and the tight central supervision exercised over it. For the Osmanlilar class as a whole could expect to make its fortunes by extensive seizure of more and more lands from the House of War, as timars and garnets multiplied with the advance northwards. The social mechanisms of booty were thus basic to the rigid unity and discipline of the Turkish State at its meridian.
Once territorial expansion ceased, however, a slow involution of its whole enormous structure was inevitable. The privileges of an extraneous slave corps, deprived of its military functions, gradually became intolerable to the bulk of the dominant class of the Empire, which eventually exerted its inert weight to normalize and recover command of the political apparatus of the Ruling Institution. The surplus rural population that had been enlisted as auxiliaries or freebooters in the armies of the Porte, turned to social revolt or brigandage once the military machine could no longer absorb it. Moreover, the stoppage of extensive acquisition of lands and treasure was inevitably to lead to much more intensive forms of exploitation within the bounds of Turkish power, at the expense of the subject rayah class. The history of the Ottoman Empire from the late 16th to the early 19th century is thus essentially that of the disintegration of the central imperial State, the consolidation of a provincial landowning class, and the degradation of the peasantry. This long drawn-out process, which was not without transient political and military recoveries, did not occur in Balkan isolation from the rest of the European continent. It was, on the contrary, deepened and aggravated by the international impact of West European economic supremacy, under whose sway the Ottoman Empire – stagnating in technological parasitism and theological obscurantism – increasingly fell. From the Price Revolution of the 16th to the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century, Balkan society was to be more and more affected by the development of capitalism in the West.
The long-term decline of the Ottoman Empire was determined by the military and economic superiority of Absolutist Europe. In the short-term, its worst reverses were suffered in Asia. The Thirteen Years’ War with Austria, from 1593 to 1606, proved a costly stalemate. But the longer and more destructive wars with Persia, which lasted with brief interruptions from 1578 to 1639, ended in frustration and defeat. It was the victorious consolidation of the Safavid State in Persia which was the immediate turning-point in the fortunes of the Osmanli State. The Persian wars, which resulted in the eventual loss of the Caucasus, inflicted immense damage on the army and bureaucracy of the Porte. Anatolia, the homeland of the ethnic Turkish population of the Empire, had never been its political centre, as we have seen. It was in Rumelia that the new Ottoman social system had been systematically implanted in the 14th and 15th centuries, land tenure and military administration shaped to the international needs of the imperial State. Anatolia, by contrast, remained much more traditional in its social and religious structure, with strong remnants of older nomadic and clan organization in the beyliks of the interior and latent hostility to the cosmopolitan laxism of Istanbul. The Anatolian timars were typically smaller and poorer than those of Rumelia. The local sipahi class, suffering from the rising costs of participation in seasonal campaigns because of the steep inflation of the late 16th century, showed less and less enthusiasm for the inter-muslim struggle with Persia. At the same time, the agrarian expansion in rural Anatolia had by now ceased; the major increase in population had ended by creating a growing class of landless peasants or levandat in the highlands. Widely recruited into the armed levies raised by provincial governors for the Persian front, the levandat acquired military training, but not discipline. The strain of the wars, and enemy victories on the eastern frontier, thus gradually precipitated a collapse of civic order in Anatolia. Timariot disaffection fused with peasant distress in a series of tumultuous upheavals – the so-called jelali risings which broke out from 1594–1610 and again in 1622–8, mingling provincial mutiny, social banditry and religious revivalism.30 It was in these years, too, that Cossack raids across the Black Sea struck with humiliating success at Varna, Sinope, Trebizond, and even pillaged the suburbs of Istanbul itself. Eventually, the sipahi leaders of the jelali rebellions of Anatolia were bought off, while their levandat following were repressed. But the damage to the internal morale of the Ottoman system caused by the spread of brigandage and anarchy in Anatolia was very great. The later 17th century was to see further jelali outbreaks, in a countryside where pacification was never complete.
In the Porte itself, meanwhile, the costs of the long Persian contest were acutely aggravated by mounting inflation caught from the West. The influx of American bullion into Renaissance Europe had worked its way through to the Turkish Empire by the last decades of the century. The gold-silver ratio within the Ottoman domains was lower than in the West, making the export of silver currency into them highly profitable for European traders, recouping in gold. The result of this massive injection of silver was naturally a steep rise in prices, which the Sultanate vainly tried to offset by debasing the asper. The value of Treasury revenues fell by half between 1534 and 1591.31 Thereafter, the annual budgets were regularly and deeply in deficit, as the wars dragged on against Austria and Persia. The consequence was inevitably a great increase in fiscal pressures on the whole subject population within the Empire. The rayah poll tax paid by the Christian peasantry multiplied six times over between 1574 and 1630.32 These measures, however, could only palliate a situation in which the State apparatus itself was now showing signs of deepening malaise and crisis.
The janissary corps and devshirme stratum which had formed the cupola of the Ottoman imperial apparatus in the age of Mehmet II were among the first to reveal the general symptoms of decomposition. Early in the 16th century, during the rule of Suleiman I, the janissaries won the right to marry and raise children, encumbrances that had originally been forbidden them. This naturally increased the cost of their maintenance, which had anyway risen enormously because of the inflation transmitted from the influx of silver from Western Europe via the Mediterranean trade of the Empire, which produced virtually no manufactures of its own. Thus janissary pay quadrupled between 1350 and 1600, while the Turkish silver asper was repeatedly devalued and the general price-level decupled.33 To support themselves, the janissaries were consequently now allowed to supplement their incomes by engaging in crafts or commerce, when not on a war-footing. Then in 1574, at the accession of Selim II, they extorted the right to enroll their sons in the janissary regiments. A professional, skill-selected military elite was thus progressively converted into a hereditary, semi-artisanal militia. Its discipline disintegrated proportionately. In 1589, the first successful janissary mutiny for higher pay ousted the current Grand Vizir, and set a pattern that was to become endemic in Istanbul political life; in 1622, the first Sultan was deposed by a janissary rising. Meanwhile, the weakening of the once hermetic insulation of the devshirme stratum from the rest of the Osmanlilar ruling class predictably led to the dissolution of its separate devshirme identity altogether. In the reign of Murad III, at the end of the 16th century, native Muslims acquired the right to enter the ranks of the janissaries. Finally, by the time of Murad IV, in the 1630’s, the devshirme levies had died out altogether. The janissary regiments, however, still possessed tax exemption and other traditional privileges. There was thus a permanent demand for enlistment in them on the part of the Muslim population; while the social unrest of the jelali period led to the spread of janissary garrisons throughout the provincial towns of the Empire for the purposes of internal security. Thus from the mid-17th century onwards, the janissaries increasingly became vast bodies of semi- or untrained urban militia, many of whom no longer resided in barracks but in their booths and workshops as petty traders and artisans (where their presence in the guilds often undermined craft standards), while the more prosperous acquired rights over local land. The military value of the janissaries soon became minimal; their main political function in the capital was to form a fanaticized masse de manoeuvre for ulemate bigotry or palace intrigues.
Meanwhile, the timar system had undergone a no less drastic degeneration. The light cavalry provided by the sipahis fell into military obsolescence with the improvement of European weaponry, and the consolidation of standing armies by the Christian powers: reluctant summer sorties by timariot horsemen, their fortitude in the field weakened by the depreciation of their incomes, were quite inadequate against the heavy fire-power of German fusiliers. Thus amidst growing corruption in Istanbul, the State tended to assign more and more timars for non-military purposes to high officials, or to absorb them back into the Treasury. The result was a steep drop in sipahi effectives by the early 17th century. The Ottoman armies henceforward came to rely largely on companies of paid musketeers or sekban units – originally irregular provincial auxiliaries, which now became the central military formations of the Empire.34 The upkeep of sekban troops as a permanent force both intensified and monetized the tax-burden in the Ottoman lands, in a conjuncture of probable economic recession in much of the Eastern Mediterranean. New cultivable land had run out in Anatolia. The spice and silk trades were captured and diverted by English and Dutch shipping, whose operations in the Indian Ocean now encircled the Ottoman Empire from behind. Egypt, on the other hand, where traditional agriculture held up well,35 slipped increasingly back into local Mamluk control. The financial and political difficulties of the State were compounded by the degeneration of the dynasty. For in the 17th century, the calibre of the imperial rulers – whose despotic authority had hitherto generally been exercised with considerable ability – collapsed because of a new succession system. From 1617 onwards, the Sultanate passed to the eldest surviving male of the Osmanli line, who had typically been sequestered from birth within the ‘Cage of Princes’, damascened dungeons virtually designed to produce pathological imbalance or imbecility. Such Sultans were in no position to control or check the steady deterioration of the State system beneath them. It was in this epoch that clericalist manoeuvres by the Sheikh-ul-Islam started to encroach on the system of political decision,36 which became steadily more venal and unstable.
Nevertheless, the Ottoman Empire proved capable of one last, great military heave into Europe in the second half of the 17th century. The setbacks of the Persian wars, the disorders of Anatolian brigandage, the humiliations of Cossack raids, and the demoralization of the janissary corps, were succeeded by an effective, if temporary reaction within the Porte. The Köprülü Vizirates, from 1656 to 1676, restored once again a vigorous and martial administration in Istanbul. Ottoman finances were redressed by forced loans and tributary extortions; expenditure was cut by pruning of sinecures; infantry training and equipment were improved in the permanent regiments; good use was made of the still punishing Tartar cavalry in the Pontic theatre. The decline of the Safavid regime in Persia concomitantly eased pressure in the East, and permitted a final Turkish push in the West. The Danubian principalities, whose rulers had become increasingly restless, were brought to heel. A twenty-year war with Venice was successfully concluded with the capture of Crete in 1669. Then in 1672, mobilizing the mounted contingents of the Crimean Khanate, Ottoman forces conquered Podolia from Poland. For the next decade, a long and savage struggle was waged against Russia for mastery of the Ukraine. Eventually blocked in this conflict, which ended with a truce confirming the status quo ante in 1682 after great devastation of the Ukraine, Turkish power was next turned against Austria in 1683. The new and even more aggressive Vizir Kara Mustapha, who had succeeded Mehmet Köprülü, assembled a large army for a frontal attack on Vienna. A hundred and fifty years after Suleiman II’s siege of the Habsburg capital, a second Osmanli assault was now launched. The failure of the first had merely stabilized the front-line of Turkish advance into Christendom. The defeat of the second, with the victorious relief of Vienna by a mixed force of Polish, Imperial, Saxon and Bavarian troops in 1683, led to a collapse of the whole Ottoman position in Central Europe. The Kopriilu recovery thus proved artificial and short-lived: its initial successes led the Porte to over-reach itself, with disastrous and irreversible results. The Viennese fiasco was followed by a protracted retreat, which ended in 1699 with the complete loss of Hungary and Transylvania to the Habsburgs, while Poland regained Podolia and Venice occupied the Morea. Henceforward, the House of Islam was to be perpetually on the defensive in the Balkans, capable at best of temporarily holding up infidel advances, at worst repeatedly and definitively yielding before them.
The brunt of the roll-back of the Turkish Empire over the next hundred years fell to Russian, rather than Austrian, Absolutism. Habsburg military impetus petered out relatively soon, after the conquest of the Banat in 1716–18. Ottoman forces checked Austrian armies in 1736–9, regaining Belgrade. But in the North, Romanov expansion in the Euxine zone could not be halted. Defeat by Russia in 1768–74 resulted in the loss of lands between the Bug and the Dniester, and the establishment of Tsarist rights of intervention in Moldavia and Wallachia. In 1783, the Crimea was absorbed into Russia; in 1791, Yedisan was annexed. Meanwhile, the whole administrative fibre of the Ottoman State was steadily deteriorating. The Divan became the pawn of rapacious cliques in the capital, bent on maximizing the profits of venality and malversation. Turkish civilian bureaucrats and Greek Pha-nariot merchants from Istanbul gained growing power and influence in the Porte after 1700, as the military capacity of the Ottoman State further weakened – the former increasingly rising to become pashas and provincial governors,37 while the latter won control of lucrative treasury positions and the Rumanian hospodarships. Offices which had once been the reserve of the devshirme, with promotion according to merit, were now sold wholesale to the highest bidders: but since, unlike the European systems, there was no security of tenure after purchase, office-holders had to squeeze the gains from their investment at top speed before they were evicted in their turn, thereby greatly increasing the pressure of extortion downwards on the masses beneath, that had to bear the burden of such an administration. A spreading racket in janissary pay-tickets developed, which came to be bought and sold to fictional members amidst universal administrative corruption. By the end of the century, there were about 100,000 registered janissaries, of whom a mere fraction had real military training: but a great many had access to weapons, and could use them for local extortion and intimidation.38 The janissaries now lay everywhere like a gangrenous mass across the towns of the Empire. Their most powerful members were often to furnish many of the local ayan notables that henceforward became a prominent feature of Ottoman provincial society.
Meanwhile, the whole land system was undergoing a transformation. The timar had long declined as an institution, together with the sipahi cavalry it had supported. The Porte pursued a deliberate policy of recovering the estates of former timariots, either by annexing them to the domains of the imperial house and then re-leasing them to speculators to gain greater cash revenues, or simply allocating them to dummy holders manipulated by palace officials. There was thus a general shift in the form of Ottoman exploitation from the timar to the iltizam: military benefices were converted into tax-farms, which yielded increased monetary flows to the Treasury. The iltizam system had been first developed by the Porte in the further Asian provinces, such as Egypt, where it had no need of mounted warriors of the type massed in Rumelia.39 The generalization of these tax-farms throughout the Empire, however, corresponded not merely to the financial needs of the Osmanli State, but also to the Muslim homogenization of the whole ruling class with the decline and disappearance of the devshirme .One of the major structural reasons for the latter process, indeed, was the alteration in the total composition of the Empire with the conquest of the Arab provinces. The spread of the iltizam fiscal unit from its Islamic homelands at the expense of the timar thus accomplished the dissolution of the institution that had been the functional complement of the devshirme in the original system of Ottoman expansionism. A concomitant phenomenon was the increase in waqf lands, nominally corporate religious estates endowed by the pious, which were the only important form of agrarian tenure that was not the ultimate property of the Sultanate.40 These were traditionally much used as a camouflaging device to render land hereditary in a single family, vested with the ‘administration’ of the waqf The early Osmanli rulers had kept a vigilant control of this devout institution; Mehmet II, in fact, had effected a general reappropriation of waqf lands by the State. In the epoch of Ottoman decline, however, waqf holdings multiplied once again, above all in Anatolia and the Arab provinces.
The advent and influence of the iltizam system transformed the situation of the peasantry. The timariot had not been able to evict or to exact dues above the statutory limits prescribed by the Sultan. The landlords of the new epoch brooked no such restrictions: the very brevity of their initial tenures incited them to super-exploitation of the peasants on their estates. In the course of the 18th century, increasing numbers of ‘life-farms’ or malikane were granted by the Porte, which moderated the short-term demands of these rural notables, but stabilized their long-term power over the villages.41 Thus in the Balkans, the timar eventually generally gave way to what became known as the chiflik system. The chiflik-holder had practically unfettered control of the labour-force at his disposal: he could drive his peasants off the land, or prevent them leaving it by entangling them in debt obligations. He could enlarge his own manorial reserve or hassachiflik at the expense of his tenants’ plots; and this became the general pattern. He would typically exact one half of the harvest of the direct producers, who were left with a mere third of their output after payment of the land-tax and the fees for its collection.42 In other words, the condition of the Balkan peasantry sank together with that of the rest of Eastern Europe, towards a common misery. In practice, it was now bound to the soil and villagers could be legally recovered by landowners if they abandoned their lands. Just as the corn traffic with Western Europe had led to an intensification of the rate of servile exploitation in Poland or Eastern Germany, without occasioning it, so the commercial production of cotton or maize for export along the coasts and up the valleys of Greece, Bulgaria and Serbia increased landlord pressures on the chifliks, and contributed to their spread. The most distinctive feature of rural relations in the South-East was the break-down of any firm civic order imposed from above: banditry became rampant, encouraged by the mountainous relief of the region, which made it the Mediterranean equivalent of flight on the Baltic plains, for the peasantry. Landlords, conversely, maintained bands of armed thugs or kirjali irregulars on their estates, to protect themselves from revolt and repress their tenantry.43 For the final term of the long involution of the Ottoman State was the virtually complete paralysis of the Porte and the usurpation of provincial power, first by military pashas in Syria or Egypt, next by derebeys or valley lords in Anatolia, and then by ayans or dynasties of local notables in Rumelia. By the end of the 18th century, the Sultanate controlled only a fraction of the 26 eyalets into which the imperial administration was formally divided.
The protracted decomposition of the Osmanli despotism, however, did not generate any ultimate feudalism. The imperial title to all secular land within the Empire was not abandoned, however many malikane grants were made for usufruct of it. The chiflik system never received formal legal sanction; nor were peasants ever juridically bound to the soil. Right down to 1826, the fortunes of the bureaucrats and tax-farmers who battened on the subject population could be arbitrarily confiscated by the Sultan at their death.44 There was no positive security of property; still less any titular nobility. The liquefaction of the old social and political order did not lead to the emergence of any cogent new one. The Osmanli State in the 19th century remained a sodden morass, artificially sustained by the rivalry of the European powers for its inheritance. Poland could be divided between Austria, Prussia and Russia, because all three were land powers with congruent access and interests in it. The Balkans could not, because there was no compatibility between the three main contenders for dominance of the region – Britain, Austria and Russia. Britain possessed maritime supremacy in the Mediterranean and commercial primacy in Turkey; the Ottoman market, indeed, imported more English goods by 1850 than France, Italy, Austria or Russia, making it a vital region for Victorian economic imperialism. British naval and industrial power precluded any harmonious arrangement for the disposition of the Ottoman Empire, baulking Russian efforts to partition it. At the same time, the progressive national awakening of die Balkan peoples after the Napoleonic epoch prevented any stabilization of the political situation in South-Eastern Europe. Serbian rebellion had broken out already in 1804; Greek insurrection followed it in 1821. Tsarist invasion in 1828–9 routed Turkish armies, and imposed the formal autonomy of Serbia, Moldavia and Wallachia from the Porte; while Anglo-French and Russian intervention both secured and confined Greek independence in 1830. These losses, derived from local movements that London or Vienna could not control, still left Turkey with a Balkan empire stretching from Bosnia to Thessaly, and Albania to Bulgaria.
International protection was to delay the ultimate demise of the Ottoman State for nearly a century, inspiring in the interim successive attempts at ‘liberal’ renovation to conform with Western capitalist norms. These were inaugurated by Mahmud II in the 1820’s, in an attempt to modernize the administrative and economic apparatus of the Sultanate. The janissaries were disbanded, and timars wound up; waqf lands were nominally recalled to the imperial Treasury; foreign officers were imported to train a new army. Central control was reasserted over the provinces, and the reign of the derebeys brought to an end. These measures rapidly proved ineffective to staunch the decay of the imperial system. Mahmud’s armies were routed by the Egyptian troops of Mehmet Ali, while his governors and functionaries often proved even more corrupt and oppressive than the local notables before them. Renewed Anglo-French pressure to liberalize and reorganize Ottoman rule followed this debacle. The result was the Tanzimat reforms of the mid-century, more closely geared to Western legal and commercial preoccupations. The Rescript of the Rose Chamber in 1839 finally assured juridical security of private property within the Empire, and religious equality before the law.45 Both had been insistently demanded by the diplomatic corps in Istanbul. State property in land, however, still remained dominant in the home countries of the Empire. It was not until 1858 that an agrarian law was passed, giving limited rights of inheritance to those in control or usufruct of them. Unsatisfied with this measure, the Western powers pressed for an extension of these rights, which was conceded in 1867, when local landowners finally acquired juridical ownership of their estates.46 But the artificial character of the new political course soon became evident. When Turkish nationalists attempted to impose a representative constitution, Sultan Abdul Hamid II had little difficulty in reimposing a brutal if rickety personal despotism in 1878. By the end of the century, a stabilization of the office-holding and landowning class had occurred, with the guarantees of security of property afforded by the Tanzimat measures. But otherwise no new social and political order arose within the Ottoman Empire, as it gradually contracted before the successive struggles for liberation fought by the subject Balkan peoples, and the manoeuvres of the major European powers to thwart or exploit them. In 1875, a popular revolt in Bulgaria was suppressed. Russia intervened and Turkey was again defeated in the field, while England once more mobilized to save it from the consequences of debacle. The result was a settlement between the European powers which granted full independence to Serbia, Rumania and Montenegro; created an autonomous Bulgaria under residual Ottoman suzerainty; and turned Bosnia over to Austrian control. In the next decade, Greece purchased Thessaly and Bulgaria gained independence.
It was the combined frustrations of accelerating imperial decline, and unwonted bureaucratic fixity during Abdul Hamid’s rule, that inspired the military officers who came to be known as the Young Turks to seize power by a putsch in 1908. Career ambitions satisfied and Comtean slogans forgotten, the political programme of the Young Turks was reduced to further dictatorial centralism and repression of the subject nationalities of the Empire.47 Defeat in the First Balkan War and disintegration in the First World War were its ignominious end. The Ottoman State thus underwent subtractions and modifications in the last century of its existence, but never acquired a new social spring. The old one simply became ever more tortured and broken. The negative reform of ‘abuses’ was inherently incapable of issuing into a positive reconstruction of the Empire, whether in the form of a new political system or a restoration of the old. Feudalism had not presided over the formation of the Ottoman Empire; Absolutism was distant from its decline. Attempts by the European powers to ‘align’ the Porte with the different institutional norms of Vienna, St Petersburg or London were equally futile: it belonged to another universe. The abortive reforms of Mahmud II and the Tanzimat epoch, followed by the Hamidian reaction and the Young Turk fiasco, produced neither a Turkish neo-despotism, nor an Eastern Absolutism, nor – naturally – a Western parliamentarism. The birth of a new form of State had to wait until the diplomatic conservation of the relics of the old ended with the international conflict of the First World War, which finally released the Osmanli realm from its misery.
The Balkans, however, were delivered from Ottoman domination before the dénouement in Turkey itself. The expulsion of the whole system of Ottoman occupation from country after country, from the early 19th century onwards, led to an unexpected agrarian pattern in the peninsula, distinct from that of the rest of both Eastern and Western Europe. Rumania, historically a late no man’s land between the Balkan and Transalbingian types of regional development, experienced the strangest twist of all the new countries that emerged after 1815. For it became the one country in Europe where a true ‘second serfdom’, unquestionably determined by the grain trade, occurred after a ‘first’ serfdom had previously come to an end. The Rumanian lands had, as we have seen, been uniquely left under their own boyar class by the Ottoman State, when it overran them in the 16th century. The formation of a stratified rural society with seigneurial lords and a subject peasantry had been very recent, because of the long retardation imposed on this area by predator nomadic rule, which only came to an end with the gradual expulsion of the Cumans and Tartars in the 13th century.48 Communal village property was widespread down to the 14th century, and it was only with the emergence of the Moldavian and Wallachian principalities in the 15th century that a landed aristocracy took shape, at first exploiting the rural producers fiscally rather than feudally – much in the fashion of the Turkic nomads that had schooled it.49 The brief unification of the two states by Michael I in the late 16th century marked the generalized adscription of the Rumanian peasantry. Serfdom was thereafter consolidated under Ottoman overlordship. In the 18th century, the Porte entrusted administration of these provinces to Greek Phanariot families from Istanbul, who came to form an intermediate ruling dynasty of so-called Hospodars in the Principalities, where tax-collection and trade were already controlled by expatriate Greeks.
Boyar manorialism was now increasingly harassed by peasant resistance, in the characteristic Eastern form of mass flights to escape dues and taxes. Austrian officials, anxious to settle the newly won Habsburg borderlands in South-Eastern Europe, calculatedly offered Rumanian refugees haven across the frontiers.50 Seriously concerned with the deteriorating labour situation in the Principalities, the Sultan in 1744 ordered one of the Hospodars, Constantine Mavrokordatos, to pacify and repopulate the Principalities. Influenced by the European Enlightenment, Mavrokordatos decreed the gradual abolition of servile bonds in both Wallachia (1746) and Moldavia (1749), by granting every peasant the right to purchase emancipation;51 a measure facilitated by the absence of any equivalent juridical category of serfdom within the Turkish-administered provinces of the Empire. There was in this century no export trade in cereals because the Porte controlled a state commercial monopoly, and merely shipped tribute in kind down to Istanbul. However, the Treaty of Adrianople in 1829, which gave Russia virtually co-suzerainty over the Rumanian lands with Turkey, abrogated Ottoman export controls. The result was a sudden and spectacular grain boom along the Danube. For by the mid 19th century, the advent of the industrial revolution in Western Europe had created a capitalist world market of a type that had never existed in the 16th and 17th centuries, with a pulling power that could transform backward agrarian regions within a few decades. Corn output in the Rumanian Principalities doubled from 1829–32, and export values from 1831–3. The acreage of cereal cultivation actually increased ten times within a decade, from 1830 to 1840.52 The rural labour for this phenomenal growth was found by reimposing servile obligations on the Rumanian peasantry and stepping up labour services to levels greater than those before Mavrokordatos’s decrees in the previous century. The one genuine case of a second serfdom in Europe was thus the work of industrial, not mercantile capitalism; and it could only have been so. Here, direct and massive inter-economic causality, operating across the length of the continent, was possible, where it had never been two or three centuries earlier. The Rumanian peasantry remained depressed and land-hungry thereafter, in conditions very similar to those of the Russian peasantry. Servile restrictions were once again legally abolished by a Reform in 1864, directly modelled on the Tsarist proclamation of 1861; as in Russia, the countryside remained dominated by feudal landlords down to the First World War.
Rumania, however, was the exception in the Balkans. Virtually everywhere else, something like the opposite process occurred. For in Croatia, Serbia, Bulgaria and Greece, the local aristocracies had been wiped out by Ottoman conquest, the land directly annexed to the Sultanate, and Turkish occupiers planted on it – by the 19th century, mostly the powerful and parasitic class of local ayan notables. Successive national revolts and wars of liberation now drove Turkish armies out of Serbia (1804–1913), Greece (1821–1913) and Bulgaria (1875–1913). The conquest of political independence in these countries was thus automatically accompanied by an economic upheaval in the countryside. For Turkish landlords normally and comprehensibly decamped with the troops that had guarded them, abandoning their estates to the peasants that had tilled them. This pattern varied considerably, according to the duration of the independence struggle. Wherever it was slow and protracted, as in Serbia and Greece, there was much more time for a native landowning stratum to emerge and expand in the course of it, appropriating chifliks outright in the later phases: wealthy Greek families, for example, bought many Turkish estates intact in Thessaly, when it was acquired from the Porte in 1881.53 In Bulgaria, on the other hand, the briefer and fiercer tempo of the independence struggle gave much less opportunity for such transfers to happen. But in all three countries, the ultimate rural economy that emerged was very similar.54 Independent Bulgaria, Greece and Serbia became essentially countries of small peasant proprietors, at a time when Prussia, Poland, Hungary and Russia were still lands of noble latifundia. Rural exploitation, naturally, did not come to an end: usurers, merchants and functionaries now relayed it in new forms in the independent states. But the fundamental agrarian pattern of the Balkan countries remained based on petty production, amidst increasing overpopulation, divided holdings and village debts. The recession of Turkish rule signified the end of traditional landlordism. Eastern Europe suffered a common social and economic backwardness at the turn of the 20th century, which separated it from Western Europe: but the South-East remained a peninsula apart, within it.

1. Xavier de Planhol, Les Fondements Géographiques de l’Histoire de l’Islam, Paris 1968, pp. 39–44, 208–9.
2. C. Cahen, ‘La Campagne de Manzikert d’Après les Sources Musulmanes’, Byzantion, IX, 1934, pp. 621–42.
3. Paul Wittek, The Rise of the Ottoman Empire, London 1963, pp. 17–20. This short and brilliant monograph is the basic work on the nature of early Ottoman expansion.
4. Wittek, The Rise of the Ottoman Empire, pp. 37–46. Wittek’s analysis of the dual principles of the Ottoman State is, in fact, an indirect echo of Ibn Khaldun’s famous division of Islamic history into alternating phases of nomadic asabiyya (characterized by religious fervour, social solidarity and military prowess) and urban farâgh or dia (characterized by economic prosperity, administrative sophistication and cultural leisure), which he believed mutually incompatible – urban civilization being unable to resist nomadic conquest, nomadic fraternity then being unable to survive urban corruption, producing a cyclical history of state formation and disintegration. Wittek’s account of the Ottoman Empire can be read as a subtle reversal of this formula: in the Turkish State, the two contradictory principles of Islamic political development for the first time came into structural harmony.
5. Ernst Werner, Die Geburt einer Grossmacht – Die Osmarten, pp. 19, 95. Werner’s work is the major Marxist study of the growth of Ottoman power; his criticism of Wittek’s neglect of the tribal drive for land behind early Osmanli expansionism, however, is supported by the research of the Turkish historian Omer Barkan.
6. P. Wittek,’ De la Défaite d’Ankara à la Prise de Constantinople (un demisiècle d’histoire ottomane)’, Revue des Etudes Islamiques, 1948, I, pp. 1–34.
7. This was for Marx the fundamental characteristic of all forms of what he called, following a long tradition, ‘Asiatic despotism’. Commenting on Bernier’s famous description of Moghul India, he wrote to Engels: ‘Bernier rightly considered the basis of all phenomena in the East – he refers to Turkey, Persia, Hindustan – to be the absence of private property in land. This is the real key, even to the Oriental heaven.’ (Selected Correspondence, p. 81). Marx’s comments on the ‘Asiatic mode of production’ raise many problems, which will be considered later. If we retain for the moment the use of the term ‘despotism’ for the Ottoman State, this should be understood in a strictly provisional and merely descriptive sense. Scientific concepts for the analysis of Oriental states in this epoch are still largely lacking.
8. H. A. R. Gibb and H. Bowen, Islamic Society and the West, Vol. I, Part I, London 1950, pp. 236–7. House-sites, vineyards and orchards within village precincts were private property (mulk), as was most urban land (the significance of these exceptions – horticulture and towns – will be discussed in their general Islamic context). In 1528, some 87 per cent of Ottoman land was miri or State property: Halil Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, London 1973, p. 110.
9. Stanford Shaw, ‘The Ottoman View of the Balkans’, in C. and B. Jelavich (ed.), The Balkans in Transition, Berkeley-Los Angeles 1963, pp. 56–60, graphically conveys this conception.
10. The terms ‘Ruling Institution’ and ‘Muslim Institution’ were first coined by A. H. Lybyer, The Government of the Ottoman Empire in the Time of Suleiman the Magnificent, Cambridge USA, 1913, pp. 36–8. Their general acceptance by subsequent scholars has been criticized by N. Itzkowitz, ‘Eighteenth Century Ottoman Realities’, Studia Islamica, XVI, 1962, pp. 81–5, but without substantiating a probant case against their use for the 16th century.
11. S. Vryonis, ‘Isidore Glabas and the Turkish Devshirme’, Speculum, XXXI, July 1956, No. 3, pp. 433–43, has established the modern dating of the institution.
12. Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 78; L. S. Stavrianos, The Balkans Since 1453, New York 1958, p. 84. Exceptionally, in Bosnia the devshirme was extended to local Muslim families.
13. The Ottoman system, of course, had deep roots in prior Muslim traditions, There were significant precedents in Islamic history for elite slave guards and commanders, as we shall see. The historical condition of the political rule of these palatine troops was the absence of economic use of slave labour in the dominant branch of production, agriculture. The Muslim world traditionally imported slaves mainly for domestic and sumptuary purposes, and these were always sharply distinguished from the privileged ‘military’ slaves. Only in the exceptional case of Southern Iraq under the Abbasids was slavery ever predominant in the agrarian economy, and there it was a relatively brief episode, which provoked the Zanj insurrections in the late 9th century. In the Turkish Empire, some estates outside the regular land system seem to have been tilled by slave sharecroppers, acquired abroad by war or purchase; but this marginal labour-force generally became assimilated to ordinary peasant status in the course of the 16th century. At the same time, the legal monopoly of land enjoyed by the Ottoman Sultans was also based on earlier Islamic traditions, going back to the first Arab conquests in the Middle East. The two features of the Turkish system discussed above were thus not arbitrary or isolated phenomena, but the culmination of a long and coherent historical development, which will be touched on later.
14. Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, pp. 108, 113. Ottoman history is still little researched: statistical estimates within it are regularly discrepant in alternative authorities. Inalcik’s own study contains two apparently contradictory figures for the number of sipahis in the reign of Suleiman I: pp. 48 and 108.
15. S. Vryonis, ‘The Byzantine Legacy and Ottoman Forms’, Dumbarton Oaks Papers, 1969–70, pp. 273–5.
16. Gibb and Bowen, Islamic Society and the West, I/I, pp. 46–56; L. Stavrianos, The Balkans Since 1453, pp. 86–7, 99–100.
17. Gibb and Bowen, Islamic Society and the West, I/I, pp. 85–6.
18. See Weber’s remarks, Economy and Society, II, pp. 844–5. In fact, Weber regarded the Near East as the ‘classic locale’ of what he precisely called ‘sultanism’: Economy and Society, III, p. 1020. At the same time, he was careful to stress that even the most arbitrary personal despotism always operated within a custom-bound ideological framework: ‘Where domination is primarily traditional, even though it is exercised by virtue of the ruler’s personal autonomy, it will be called patrimonial authority; where it operates primarily on the basis of discretion, it will be called sultanism. . . . Sometimes it appears that sultanism is completely unrestrained by tradition, but this is never in fact the case. The non-traditional element is not, however, rationalized in impersonal terms, but consists only in an extreme development of the ruler’s discretion. It is this which distinguishes it from every form of rational authority.’ Economy and Society, I, p. 232.
19. Dushan’s Code had obliged the Serbian peasant to work on his lord’s land two days a week. According to Inalcik, under Ottoman rule, the rayah owed the sipahi only three days of labour a year: The Ottoman Empire, p. 13. His own subsequent account of the services due to timar-holders does not altogether tally with this very low claim (pp. 111-12). But there is no reason to doubt the relative improvement in the position of the Balkan peasantry.
20. H. Inalcik, ‘Ottoman Methods of Conquest’, Studi a slamica, II, 195, pp. 104–16.
21. The Bosnian historian Branislav Djurdjev has been mainly responsible for bringing to light this process of social regression. For an account of his work, and the discussions it has provoked, see W. S. Vucinich, ‘The Yugoslav Lands in the Ottoman Period: Post-War Marxist Interpretations of Indigenous and Ottoman Institutions’, The Journal of Modern History, XXVII, No. 3, September 1955, pp. 287–305. Djurdjev’s emphasis on the contradictory character of the initial Ottoman impact on Balkan society contrasts with the predominant Russian and Turkish views, which tend to emphasize unilaterally either destruction and repression, or pacification and prosperity, as the outcome of Ottoman conquest. For an example of Soviet interpretations, see Z. V. Udal’tsova, ‘O Vnutrennykh Prichinakh Padeniya Vizantii v XV Veke’, Voprosy Istorii, July 1953, No. 7, p. 120 – an article commemorating, or deploring, the 500th anniversary of the fall of Constantinople, which claims that Turkish rule led straightaway to intensified exploitation of the rural masses. For a Turkish position, see H. Inalcik, ‘L’Empire Ottomane’, Actes du Premier Congrès International des Etudes Balkaniques et Sud-Est Européennes, Sofia 1969, pp. 81–5. The tension between the two tendencies is marked in the contributions to this Congress, which also includes a crisp statement by Djurdjev recapitulating his judgements: B. Djurdjev, ‘Les Changements Historiques et Ethniques chez les Peuples Slaves du Sud Après la Conquête Turque’, pp. 575–8.
22. See W. S. Vucinich, ‘The Nature of Balkan Society under Ottoman Rule’, Slavic Review, December 1962, pp. 603, 604–5, 614.
23. Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 128.
24. Omer Lutfi Barkan, ‘Essai sur les Données Statistiques des Registres de Recensement dans l’Empire Ottomane aux XVe et XVTe Siècles’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, Vol. I/I, August 1957, pp. 27–8: apart from the macrocephaly of Istanbul itself (accompanied by a decline of Aleppo and Damascus), the population of twelve representative provincial towns grew by some 90 per cent in the 16th century.
25. Halil Inalcik, ‘Capital Formation in the Ottoman Empire’, The Journal of Economic History, XXIX, No. 1, March 1969, pp. 108–19.
26. Bernard Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey, London 1969, p. 393. Lewis plainly exaggerates in claiming that there was ‘no state’, of course.
27. Inalcik, ‘Capital Formation in the Ottoman Empire’, pp. 103–6.
28. Gibb and Bowen, Islamic Society and the West, I/I, pp. 20–1.
29. For particular emphasis on the use of European technicians and artisans by the Porte, see R. Mousnier, Les XVIe et XVIIe Siècles, Paris 1954, pp. 463–4, 474.
30. For the phenomenon of the Anatolian levandat, and the jelali revolts generally, see V. J. Parry, ‘The Ottoman Empire 1566–1617’, The New Camridge Modern History, III, pp. 372–4, and ‘The Ottoman Empire 1617–1648’, The New Cambridge Modern History, IV, pp. 627–30.
31. Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 49.
32. Inalcik, ‘L’Empire Ottomane’, pp. 96–7.
33. Stavrianos, The Balkans Since 1453, p. 121; Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey, pp. 28–9.
34. Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, p. 48.
35. See Stanford Shaw, The Financial and Administrative Organization and Development of Ottomon Egypt, 1517-1798, Princeton 1962, p. 21.
36. Inalcik, ‘L’Empire Ottomane’, p. 95.
37. N. Itzkowitz, ‘Eighteenth Century Ottoman Realities’, pp. 86–7.
38. For accounts of the decadence of the janissary system, see Gibb and Bowen, Islamic Society and the West, I/I, pp. 180–4; Stavrianos, The Balkans since 1453, pp. 120–2, 219–20.
39. For the emergence and character of the iltizam system in Egypt, see Shaw, The Financial and Administrative Organization and Development of Ottoman Egypt, pp. 29–39.
40. Bulgarian historians have laid great – too great – emphasis on the importance of waqf lands in the Ottoman social formation, in developing their claim that it was essentially feudal in character – a classification rejected, correctly in my view, by most Turkish historians. Since waqf lands were the nearest juridical category to private agrarian property, their extent can be used to argue that a feudal content lay concealed behind legal fictions of imperial-religious control. In fact, there is no reason to believe that waqf lands ever predominated in the Balkan and Anatolian countryside, or determined basic relations of production in the Ottoman social formation. But their increase in the epoch of Ottoman decline is well attested. For an able survey of the waqf phenomenon, see V. Mutafcieva and S. Dimitrov, ‘Die Agrarverhältnisse im Osmanischen Reiches im XV – XVI Jh.’, Actes du Premier Congrès des Etudes Balkaniques, pp. 689–702, which estimates them at perhaps one third of the total land area of the home countries, concentrated in the Balkans mainly in Thrace, the Aegean and Macedonia: they were virtually or completely unknown in Serbia or the Morea.
41. Gibb and Bowen, Islamic Society and the West, I/I, pp. 255–6. The most oppressive landlords were always tax-farmers, closely followed by religious authorities; op. cit., p. 247.
42. Stavrianos, The Balkans since 1453, pp. 138–42.
43. T. Stoianovich, ‘Land Tenure and Related Sectors of the Balkan Economy 1600–1800’, The Journal of Economic History, XII, Summer 1953, No. 3, pp. 401, 409–11.
44. Şerif Mardin, ‘Power, Civil Society and Culture in the Ottoman Empire’, Comparative Studies in Society and History, Vol. n, 1969, p. 277.
45. Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey, pp. 106–8.
46. H. Inalcik, ‘Land Problems in Turkish History’, The Moslem World, XLV, 1955, pp. 226–7. Inalcik comments that Western legal concepts were only fully applied to landownership, without conditions or stipulations, for the first time in 1926.
47. Even the most indulgent recent study of the Young Turk regime concludes that it was unable to create any new institutions, but merely exploited traditional mechanisms of rule for its own purposes: Feroz Ahmed, The Young Turks, Oxford 1969, pp. 164–5.
48. The historical origins of the Rumanian social formation in the late mediaeval epoch are charted in H. H. Stahl, Les Anciennes Communautés Villageoises Roumaines. Asservissement et Pénétration Capitaliste, Bucharest 1969, pp. 25–45: a very distinguished work, which casts light on many aspects of the social development of Eastern Europe.
49. There is a meticulous periodization of this whole process in Stahl, Les Anciennes Communautés Villageoises, pp. 163–89.
50. W. H. MacNeill, Europe’s Steppe Frontier 1500-1800, Chicago 1964, p. 204.
51. For a discussion of the emancipation decrees and boyar reaction to them, see A. Oţetea, ‘Le Second Asservissement des Paysans Roumains (1746–1821)’, Nouvelles Etudes d’Histoire, I, Bucharest 1955, pp. 299–312.
52. A. Oţetea, ‘Le Second Servage dans les Principautés Danubiennes’, Nouvelles Etudes d’Histoire, II, Bucharest 1960, p. 333.
53. Stavrianos, The Balkans since 1453, pp. 478–9.
54. Albania formed a distinct case, because of the Islamization of the majority of the population under Ottoman rule, and the preservation of tribal social patterns in the mountains. Turkish recruitment of Albanians into the Osmanli State apparatus was traditional; the Hamidian reaction had especially relied on their loyalty. Thus the local Muslim notables opted for independence only at the last moment in 1912, when it was obvious that Turkish power was finished in the Balkans. Landlordism was consequently unimpaired by the end of Ottoman rule; the alpine tribalism of much of the country, on the other hand, inevitably limited large-estate agriculture.